Letter XXVII.

To Flavian, Bishop of
Constantinople.

Leo to Flavian, bishop of Constantinople.

An acknowledgment of Flavian’s first letter and a
promise of a fuller reply.

On the first opportunity we could find, which was
the coming of our honourable son Rodanus, we acknowledge, beloved, the
arrival of your packet, which was to give
us information about the case which has been stirred up to our grief
among you by misguided error.  Since this man, who has long seemed
to be religiously disposed, has expressed himself in the Faith
otherwise than is right, though he never ought to have departed from
the catholic tradition, but to have persevered in the same belief as is
held by all.  But on this matter we are replying more
fully by him who brought your letter to us,
beloved:  that we may give you all necessary instructions,
beloved, on the whole matter.  For we do not allow either him to
persist in his perverse conviction; or you, beloved, who with such
faithful zeal are resisting his wrong and foolish error to be long
disturbed by the adversary’s opposition.  Our aforesaid son,
by whom we are sending this letter, we desire you to receive with the
affection he deserves, and to reply when he returns to us.  Dated
21st May in the consulship of Asturius and Protogenes
(449).

---

   
*Epistolas*.  This refers to Lett. XXII., and includes
the *gesta* (or minutes of the synod’s proceedings) which
accompanied it.

    This is the Tome
(Letter XXVIII.):  it will be noticed that Flavian (in Lett.
XXII.) had not asked for any instructions, but only that Leo should
inform the bishops under his jurisdiction of Eutyches’ deposition
(chap. iv.).  Flavian’s second letter (XXVI.), however, does
mention *vestras sacras litteras*, which he hopes will avoid the
necessity of a council (chap. iii.).  Leo himself seems to be
conscious of this:  for in Letter XXXIII., chap. 2, he twice
pointedly puts in the word “seems,” as if Flavian had not
expressed himself quite clearly:  “the points which he seems
to have referred to us,” and “this error which seems to
have arisen.”