Letter CLXIV.

To Leo Augustus.

Leo, the bishop, to Leo Augustus.

I.  *He sends envoys but deprecates any
fresh discussion of the Faith.*

Rejoicing that it has been proved to me by 

many clear proofs with what earnestness
you consult the interests of the universal Church, I have not delayed
to obey your Majesty’s commands on the first opportunity, by
despatching Domitian and Geminian my brothers and fellow-bishops, who
in furtherance of my earnest prayers, shall entreat you for the
peaceful acceptance of the gospel-teaching and obtain the liberty of
the Faith in which through the instruction of the Holy Spirit you
yourself are so conspicuously eminent, now that the enemies of Christ
are driven far away, who even if they had wished to conceal their
madness, could not lie hid, because the holy simplicity of the
Lord’s flock is very different from the
pretences of beasts who hide themselves in sheeps’ clothing, nor
can they creep in by hypocrisy now that their exceeding madness has
revealed them.  Recognize, therefore, august and venerable
Emperor, how that you are called by Divine providence to the
guardianship of the whole world, and understand what aid you owe to
your Mother, the Church, who makes especial boast of you. 
Disputes that are ended must not be allowed to rise with renewed vigour
against the triumphs of the Almighty’s right hand, especially
when this can in no wise be allowed to heretics, whose attempts have
long ago been condemned and the labours of the faithful have a just
claim to this result, that all the fulness of the Church shall remain
secure in the completeness of her unity, and that nothing whatever of
what has been well laid down shall be reconsidered, because, after
constitutions have been legitimately framed under Divine guidance, to
wish still to wrangle is the sign not of a peace-making but of a
rebellious spirit, as says the Apostle, “for to strive with words
is profitable for nothing, but for the subverting of them that
hear.”

II.  *In matters of Faith human rhetoric is
out of place.*

For if it be always free for human fancies to
assert themselves in dispute, there never will be wanting men who will
dare to oppose the Truth, and to put their trust in the glib utterances
of this world’s wisdom, whereas the Christian Faith and wisdom
knows from the teaching of our Lord Jesus
Christ Himself how strictly it ought to shun this most harmful
vanity.  For when Christ was about to summon all nations to the
illumination of the Faith, He chose those who were to devote themselves
to the preaching of the Gospel not from among philosophers or orators,
but took humble fishermen as the instruments by which He would reveal
Himself, lest the heavenly teaching, which was of itself full of mighty
power, should seem to need the aid of words.  And hence the
Apostle protests and says, “For Christ sent me not to baptize but
to preach the Gospel, not in wisdom of words lest the cross of Christ
should be made void; for the word of the cross is to them indeed that
perish foolishness, but to those which are being saved it is the power
of God.  For it is written, I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise and the prudence of the prudent will I
reject.  Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the
inquirer of this age? has not God made foolish
the wisdom of this world?”  For
rhetorical arguments and clever debates of man’s device make
their chief boast in this, that in doubtful matters which are obscured
by the variety of opinions they can induce their hearers to accept that
view which each has chosen for his own genius and eloquence to bring
forward; and thus it happens that what is maintained with the greatest
eloquence is reckoned the truest.  But Christ’s Gospel needs
not this art; for in it the true teaching stands revealed by its own
light:  nor is there any seeking for that which shall please the
ear, when to know Who is the Teacher is sufficient for true
faith.

III.  *Eutyches’ dogma is condemned
by the testimony of Scripture and cannot further be
entertained.*

But nothing severs those who are deceived by their
own inventions, from the light of the Gospel so much as their not
thinking that the Lord’s Incarnation
appertains in a true sense to man’s, that is, our, nature: 
as if it were unworthy of God’s glory
that the majesty of the impassible Word should have taken the reality
of human flesh, whereas men’s salvation could not otherwise have
been restored had not He Who is in the form of God deigned also to take the form of a slave.  And
hence since the holy Synod of Chalcedon, which was attended by all the
provinces of the Roman world and obtained universal acceptance for its
decisions, and is in complete harmony therein with the most sacred
council of Nicæa, has cut off all the wicked followers of the
Eutychian dogma from the body of the catholic communion, how shall any
of the lapsed regain the peace of the church, without purging himself
by a full course of penitence?  For what licence can be granted
them for discussing, when they have deserved to be condemned by a just
and holy

judgment, so
that they might most truly fall under that sentence of the blessed
Apostle, wherewith at the very outset of the infant Church he overthrew
the enemies of Christ’s cross, saying:  “every spirit
which confesses Jesus Christ to have come in the flesh is of
God, and every spirit which dissolves Jesus is
not of God, but this is antichrist.”  And this pre-existent
teaching of the Holy Ghost we must faithfully and stedfastly make use
of, lest, by admitting the discussions of such men the authority of the
divinely inspired decrees be diminished, when in all parts of your
kingdom and in all borders of the earth that Faith which was confirmed
at Chalcedon is being established on the surest basis of peace, nor is
any one worthy of the name of Christian who cuts himself off from
communion with us.  Of whom the Apostle says, “a man that is
heretical after a first and a second admonition, avoid, knowing that
such a one is perverse and condemned by his own judgment.”

IV.  *If the Divine mercy is to be
exercised, the heretics must cease entirely from the error of their
ways.*

What therefore the unholy parricide has
perpetrated by seizing on the holy Church and cruelly murdering its
very ruler, cannot be expiated by man’s forgiveness, unless He
Who alone can rightly punish such things, and alone can of His
unspeakable mercy remit them, be propitiated.  But though we are
not anxious for vengeance, we cannot in any way be allied with the
devil’s servants.  Yet if we learn they are quitting the
ranks of heresy, repenting them of their error and turning from the
weapons of discord to the lamentations of sorrow, we also can intercede
for them, lest they perish for ever, thus following the example of the
Lord’s loving-kindness, who, when nailed
to the wood of the cross prayed for His persecutors, “Father,
forgive them; for they know not what they do.”  And that Christian love may do
this profitably for its enemies, wicked heretics must cease to harass
God’s ever religious and ever devout
Church; they must not dare to disturb the souls of the simple by their
falsehoods, to the end that, where in all former times the purest faith
has flourished, the teaching of the Gospel and of the Apostles may now
also have free course; because we also imitating, so far as we can, the
Divine mercy desire no one to be punished by justice, but all to be
released by mercy.

V.  *Let him restore the refugee clergy and
laity and utterly reject those who persist in heresy.*

I entreat your clemency, listen to the suggestions
of my brethren already mentioned, whom, as I some time ago have said in
a former letter, I have sent not to
wrangle with the condemned, but merely to intercede with you for the
stability of the catholic Faith.  And in accordance with your
faith in and regard for the Divine Majesty this especially you should
grant, that completely setting aside the contentions of heretics you
should deign to bestow a merciful attention on those who have fallen
upon such evil days, and, after restoring the liberty of the church of
Alexandria to its pristine state, should set up there a bishop who,
upholding the decrees of the Synod of Chalcedon and agreeing with the
ordinances of the Gospel, shall be able to restore peace among that
greatly disturbed people.  Those bishops and clergy also whom the
unholy parricide has driven out of their churches, should be recalled
at your Majesty’s command, all others also, whom a like
maliciousness has banished from their dwellings, being restored to
their former estate, to the end that we may have due cause fully and
perfectly to rejoice in the grace of God and
your faith without any further noise of strife.  For if any one is
so forgetful of the Christian hope and his own salvation as to venture
by any dispute to assail the Evangelical and Apostolical decrees of the
holy Synod of Chalcedon, thus overthrowing the most sacred Council of
Nicæa also, him with all heretics who have held blasphemous and
abominable views on the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ we condemn by a like anathema and equal
curse, so that, without refusing the remedy of repentance to those who
make full and legitimate atonement, the sentence of the Synod, which is
based on truth, may rest upon those who still resist.  Dated 17th
of August, in the consulship of Leo and Majorian Augusti
(458).

---

    Portions of this letter
are found quoted by various ancient Fathers, e.g. by Popes Vigilius and
Pelagius II. in the sixth cent; by Facundus, bishop of Hermiæ, in
the same century, and almost one half of the whole by Prudentius,
bishop of Troyes (ninth cent.) in his famous treatise on Predestination
against John Scotus Erigena.  Quesnel, however, appears to have
been the first to print it as a whole *ex codice Grimanico*;
after which the Ball. also discovered it in the Ratisbon ms.

    Loosely quoted from
2 Tim. ii. 14.

    1 Cor. i. 17–20.

    1 John iv. 2, 3.  For the reading *solvit*
(dissolves), cf. Lett. XXVIII. (Tome), chap. 5 and note.

    Tit. iii. 10, 11.

    S. Luke xxiii. 34.

    Viz. Lett. CLXII. chap.
iii.

Letter CLXV.

To Leo Augustus.

[This letter, which is sometimes called the Second Tome,
contains the detailed statement of the catholic doctrine of the
Incarnation, which Leo had promised the Emperor in Letter CLVI. 
It consists of 9 chapters, but, as chaps. iii. to viii. and parts of
ii. and ix. are almost identical in language with Letter CXXIV.,
already given in full, I have not thought it necessary to reproduce the
letter here.  At the end a long series of quotations 

from Hilary, Ambrose and other Fathers bearing
upon the doctrine are also added, but these also are dispensed with in
accordance with our general practice, as we are now presenting Leo and
no one else to the reader.]

---