Sermon III.

On His Birthday, III:  Delivered
on the Anniversary of his Elevation to the Pontificate.

I.  *The honour of being raised to the
episcopate must be referred solely to the Divine Head of the
Church.*

As often as God’s
mercy deigns to bring round the day of His gifts to us, there is,
dearly-beloved, just and reasonable cause for rejoicing, if only our
appointment to the office be referred to the praise of Him who gave
it.  For though this recognition of God
may well be found in all His priests, yet I take it to be peculiarly
binding on me, who, regarding my own utter insignificance and the
greatness of the office undertaken, ought myself also to utter that
exclamation of the Prophet, “Lord, I
heard Thy speech and was afraid:  I considered Thy works and was
dismayed.”  For
what is so unwonted and so dismaying as labour to the frail, exaltation
to the humble, dignity to the undeserving?  And yet we do not
despair nor lose heart, because we put our trust not in ourselves but
in Him who works in us.  And hence also we have sung with
harmonious voice the psalm of David, dearly beloved, not in our own
praise, but to the glory of Christ the Lord.  For it is He of whom it is prophetically
written, “Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedeck,” that is,
not after the order of Aaron, whose priesthood descending along his own
line of offspring was a temporal ministry, and ceased with the law of
the Old Testament, but after the order of Melchizedeck, in whom was
prefigured the eternal High Priest.  And no reference is made to
his parentage because in him it is understood that He was portrayed,
whose generation cannot be declared.  And finally, now that the
mystery of this Divine priesthood has descended to human agency, it
runs not by the line of birth, nor is that which flesh and blood
created, chosen, but without regard to the privilege of paternity and
succession by inheritance, those men are received by the Church as its
rulers whom the Holy Ghost prepares:  so that in the people of
God’s adoption, the whole body of which
is priestly and royal, it is not the prerogative of earthly origin
which obtains the unction, but the
condescension of Divine grace which creates the bishop.

II. 
*From Christ and through S. Peter the priesthood is handed on in
perpetuity.*

Although, therefore, dearly beloved, we be found
both weak and slothful in fulfilling the duties of our office, because,
whatever devoted and vigorous action we desire to do, we are hindered
by the frailty of our very condition; yet having the unceasing
propitiation of the Almighty and perpetual Priest, who being like us
and yet equal with the Father, brought down His Godhead even to things
human, and raised His Manhood even to things Divine, we worthily and
piously rejoice over His dispensation, whereby, though He has delegated
the care of His sheep to many shepherds, yet He has not Himself
abandoned the guardianship of His beloved flock.  And from His
overruling and eternal protection we have received the support of the
Apostles’ aid also, which assuredly does not cease from its
operation:  and the strength of the foundation, on which the whole
superstructure of the Church is reared, is not weakened by the weight of the temple that rests
upon it.  For the solidity of that faith which was praised in the
chief of the Apostles is perpetual:  and as that remains which
Peter believed in Christ, so that remains which Christ instituted in
Peter.  For when, as has been read in the Gospel lesson, the Lord had
asked the disciples whom they believed Him to be amid the various
opinions that were held, and the blessed Peter had replied, saying,
“Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God,” the Lord says,
“Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona, because flesh and flood hath
not revealed it to thee, but My Father, which is in heaven.  And I
say to thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build My
church, and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.  And
I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven.  And
whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed also in
heaven.”

III.  *S. Peter’s work is still
carried out by his successors.*

The dispensation of Truth therefore abides, and
the blessed Peter persevering in the strength of the Rock, which he has
received, has not abandoned the helm of the Church, which he
undertook.  For he was ordained before the rest in such a way that
from his being called the Rock, from his being pronounced the
Foundation, from his being constituted the Doorkeeper of the kingdom of
heaven, from his being set as the Umpire to bind and to loose, whose
judgments shall retain their validity in heaven, from all these
mystical titles we might know the nature of his association with
Christ.  And still to-day he more fully and effectually performs
what is entrusted to him, and carries out every part of his duty and
charge in Him and with Him, through Whom he has been glorified. 
And so if anything is rightly done and rightly decreed by us, if
anything is won from the mercy of God by our
daily supplications, it is of his work and merits whose power lives and
whose authority prevails in his See.  For this, dearly-beloved,
was gained by that confession, which, inspired in the Apostle’s
heart by God the Father, transcended all the
uncertainty of human opinions, and was endued with the firmness of a
rock, which no assaults could shake.  For throughout the Church
Peter daily says, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living
God,” and every tongue which confesses
the Lord, accepts the instruction his voice
conveys.  This Faith conquers the devil, and breaks the bonds of
his prisoners.  It uproots us from this earth and plants us in
heaven, and the gates of Hades cannot prevail against it.  For
with such solidity is it endued by God that
the depravity of heretics cannot mar it nor the unbelief of the heathen
overcome it.

IV.  *This festival then is in S.
Peter’s honour, and the progress of his flock redounds to his
glory.*

And so, dearly beloved, with reasonable obedience we
celebrate to-day’s festival by such methods, that in my humble
person he may be recognized and honoured, in whom abides the care of
all the shepherds, together with the charge of the sheep commended to
him, and whose dignity is not abated even in so unworthy an heir. 
And hence the presence of my venerable brothers and fellow-priests, so
much desired and valued by me, will be the more sacred and precious, if
they will transfer the chief honour of this service in which they have
deigned to take part to him whom they know to be not only the patron of
this see, but also the primate of all bishops.  When therefore we
utter our exhortations in your ears, holy brethren, believe that he is
speaking whose representative we are:  because it is his warning
that we give, nothing else but his teaching that we preach, beseeching
you to “gird up the loins of your 

mind,” and
lead a chaste and sober life in the fear of God, and not to let your mind forget his supremacy and
consent to the lusts of the flesh.  Short and fleeting are the
joys of this world’s pleasures which endeavour to turn aside from
the path of life those who are called to eternity.  The faithful
and religious spirit, therefore, must desire the things which are
heavenly, and being eager for the Divine promises, lift itself to the
love of the incorruptible Good and the hope of the true Light. 
But be sure, dearly-beloved, that your labour, whereby you resist vices
and fight against carnal desires, is pleasing and precious in
God’s sight, and in God’s mercy will profit not only yourselves but me
also, because the zealous pastor makes his boast of the progress of the
Lord’s flock.  “For ye are my
crown and joy,” as the
Apostle says; if your faith, which from the beginning of the Gospel has
been preached in all the world has continued in love and
holiness.  For though the whole Church, which is in all the world,
ought to abound in all virtues, yet you especially, above all people,
it becomes to excel in deeds of piety, because founded as you are on
the very citadel of the Apostolic Rock, not only has our Lord Jesus Christ redeemed you in common with all men, but
the blessed Apostle Peter has instructed you far beyond all men. 
Through the same Christ our Lord.

---

    Hab. iii. 2 (LXX.).

    Ps. cx. 4.

    Quesnel is no doubt
correct in taking this literally as alluding to the anointing of
bishops at consecration:  cf. Serm. IV. chap. 1. 
*Sancti Spiritus unctio consecrat sacerdotes*, and lower
down he speaks of the *effusum benedictionis unguentum*:  so
also in Serm. LIX. chap. 7, *sacratior est unctio sacerdotum*.

    We read
*lassescit* with Hurter, instead of the unintelligible
*lacessit*of the mss.

    By the *evangelica
lectio* is meant the Gospel for the day, just as, for instance, in
Sermon XXXIII. chap. 1, &c.

    S. Matt. xvi. 16–19.

    1 Pet. i. 13.

    1 Thess. ii. 20.