Sermon LXXXII.

On the Feast
of the Apostles Peter and Paul (June 29).

I.  *Rome owes its high position to these
Apostles.*

The whole world, dearly-beloved, does indeed take
part in all holy anniversaries, and loyalty to the one Faith demands
that whatever is recorded as done for all men’s salvation should
be everywhere celebrated with common rejoicings.  But, besides
that reverence which to-day’s festival has gained from all the
world, it is to be honoured with special and peculiar exultation in our
city, that there may be a predominance of gladness on the day of their
martyrdom in the place where the chief of the Apostles met their
glorious end.  For these
are the men, through whom the light of Christ’s gospel shone on
thee, O Rome, and through whom thou, who wast the teacher of error,
wast made the disciple of Truth.  These are thy holy Fathers and
true shepherds, who gave thee claims to be numbered among

the heavenly kingdoms, and
built thee under much better and happier auspices than they, by whose
zeal the first foundations of thy walls were laid:  and of whom
the one that gave thee thy name defiled thee with his brother’s
blood.  These are they who promoted thee
to such glory, that being made a holy nation, a chosen people, a
priestly and royal state, and the head
of the world through the blessed Peter’s holy See thou didst
attain a wider sway by the worship of God than
by earthly government.  For although thou wert increased by many
victories, and didst extend thy rule on land and sea, yet what thy
toils in war subdued is less than what the peace of Christ has
conquered.

II.  *The extension of the Roman empire was
part of the Divine scheme*.

For the good, just, and Almighty God, Who has never withheld His mercy from mankind, and
has ever instructed all men alike in the knowledge of Himself by the
most abundant benefits, has by a more secret counsel and a deeper love
shown pity upon the wanderers’ voluntary blindness and
proclivities to evil, by sending His co-equal and co-eternal
Word.  Which becoming flesh so united the Divine Nature with the
human that He by lowering His Nature to the uttermost has raised our
nature to the highest.  But that the result of this unspeakable
Grace might be spread abroad throughout the world, God’s Providence made ready the Roman empire, whose
growth has reached such limits that the whole multitude of nations are
brought into close connexion.  For the Divinely-planned work
particularly required that many kingdoms should be leagued together
under one empire, so that the preaching of the world might quickly
reach to all people, when they were held beneath the rule of one
state.  And yet that state, in ignorance of the Author of its
aggrandisement though it rule almost all nations, was enthralled by the
errors of them all, and seemed to itself to have fostered religion
greatly, because it rejected no falsehood.  And hence its
emancipation through Christ was the more wondrous that it had been so
fast bound by Satan.

III.  *On the dispersing of the Twelve, St.
Peter was sent to Rome.*

For when the twelve Apostles, after receiving through
the Holy Ghost the power of speaking with all tongues, had distributed
the world into parts among themselves, and undertaken to instruct it in
the Gospel, the most blessed Peter, chief of the Apostolic band, was
appointed to the citadel of the Roman empire, that the light of Truth
which was being displayed for the salvation of all the nations, might
spread itself more effectively throughout the body of the world from
the head itself.  What nation had not representatives then living
in this city; or what peoples did not know what Rome had learnt? 
Here it was that the tenets of philosophy must be crushed, here that
the follies of earthly wisdom must be dispelled, here that the cult of
demons must be refuted, here that the blasphemy of all idolatries must
be rooted out, here where the most persistent superstition had gathered
together all the various errors which had anywhere been devised.

IV*.  St. Peter’s love conquered his
fears in coming to Rome.*

To this city then, most blessed Apostle Peter,
thou dost not fear to come, and when the Apostle Paul, the partner of
thy glory, was still busied with regulating other churches, didst enter
this forest of roaring beasts, this deep, stormy ocean with greater
boldness than when thou didst walk upon the sea.  And thou who
hadst been frightened by the high priest’s maid in the house of
Caiaphas, hadst no fear of Rome the mistress of the world.  Was
there any less power in Claudius, any less cruelty in Nero than in the
judgment of Pilate or the Jews’ savage rage?  So then it was
the force of love that conquered the reasons for fear:  and thou
didst not think those to be feared whom thou hadst undertaken to
love.  But this feeling of fearless affection thou hadst even then
surely conceived when the profession of thy love for the Lord was confirmed by the mystery of the thrice-repeated
question.  And nothing else was demanded of this thy earnest
purpose than that thou shouldst bestow the food wherewith thou hadst
thyself been enriched, on feeding His sheep whom thou didst
love.

V.  *S. Peter was providentially prepared
for his great mission.*

Thy confidence also was increased by many miraculous
signs, by many gifts of grace, by many proofs of power.  Thou
hadst already taught the people, who from the number of the circumcised
had believed:  thou hadst already founded the Church at Antioch,
where first the dignity of the Christian name arose:  thou hadst
already instructed Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, in
the laws of the Gospel-message:  and, without doubt as to the
success of the work, with full knowledge of the short span of thy life
didst carry 

the trophy of
Christ’s cross into the citadel of Rome, whither by the Divine
fore-ordaining there accompanied thee the honour of great power and the
glory of much suffering.

VI.  *Many noble martyrs have sprung from
the blood of SS. Peter and Paul*.

Thither came also thy blessed brother-Apostle
Paul, “the vessel of election,” and
the special teacher of the Gentiles, and was associated with thee at a
time when all innocence, all modesty, all freedom was in jeopardy under
Nero’s rule.  Whose fury, inflamed by excess of all vices,
hurled him headlong into such a fiery furnace of madness that he was
the first to assail the Christian name with a general persecution, as
if God’s Grace could be quenched by the
death of saints, whose greatest gain it was to win eternal happiness by
contempt of this fleeting life.  “Precious,”
therefore, “in the eyes of the Lord is
the death of His saints:”  nor
can any degree of cruelty destroy the religion which is founded on the
mystery of Christ’s cross.  Persecution does not diminish
but increase the church, and the Lord’s
field is clothed with an ever richer crop, while the grains, which fall
singly, spring up and are multiplied a hundred-fold.  Hence how large a progeny have
sprung from these two Heaven-sown seeds is shown by the thousands of
blessed martyrs, who, rivalling the Apostles’ triumphs, have
traversed the city far and wide in purple-clad and ruddy-gleaming
throngs, and crowned it, as it were with a single diadem of countless
gems.

VII.  *No distinction must be drawn between
the merits of the two.*

And over this band, dearly-beloved, whom
God has set forth for our example in patience
and for our confirmation in the Faith, there must be rejoicing
everywhere in the commemoration of all the saints, but of these two
Fathers’ excellence we must rightly make our boast in louder joy,
for God’s Grace has raised them to so
high a place among the members of the Church, that He has set them like
the twin light of the eyes in the body, whose Head is Christ. 
About their merits and virtues, which pass all power of speech, we must
not make distinctions, because they were equal in their
election, alike in their
toils, undivided in their death.  But as we have proved for
ourselves, and our forefathers maintained, we believe, and are sure
that, amid all the toils of this life, we must always be assisted in
obtaining God’s Mercy by the prayers of
special interceders, that we may be raised by the Apostles’
merits in proportion as we are weighed down by our own sins. 
Through our Lord Jesus Christ,
&c.

---

    *Natali*, lit.
birthday; but the early Church gave this beautiful name to, and kept
the memory of Saints on, the day of their death (cf. below, *in die
martyrii eorum*) in all cases except that of S. John the
Baptist (from the importance of his natural birthday in connexion with
the Lord’s Nativity).  The
Conversion of S. Paul is a later exception.

    It is of course well
known that this is very debatable ground, and as such, it is wiser to
leave it untouched in a work which is only intended as a means of
rendering English-speaking people acquainted with Leo’s views and
statements.  It will be noticed however, that the historically
verified connexion of S. Paul with Rome is as nothing in his eyes in
comparison with the very apocryphal connexion of S. Peter:  cf.
below, *per sacram beati Petri sedem*, on which the Ballerinii
very appropriately quote Prosper *de Ingratis:—*

   Sedes Roma Petri, quæ pastoralis
honore

   facta caput mundo, quidquid non possidet
armis

   *religione tenet*.

   The Roman Calendar still retains the double
commemoration on June 29.

    i.e. Romulus (the
traditional founder of Rome) murdered his brother, Remus.

    Cf. 1 Pet. ii. 9.

    Acts ix. 15.

    Ps. cxvi. 15.

    This is a
commonplace with the Fathers:  S. Augustine is esp. fond of it;
Hurter quotes from him *de catech. rud*. chap. xxiv. and four
times on the Psalms.  Cf. Serm. XXXVI. chap. iii. n. 1.

    *Electio
pares* (*fecit*) omitted by the oldest Vatican
ms. but undoubtedly genuine, the allusion
being obviously to S. Paul’s claim to equal apostleship with the
Twelve more than once advanced (e.g. 2 Cor. xi. 5, &c.).  This then is an
interesting passage when read side by side with Leo’s Petrine
claims, but does not really contradict them, though the language here
used, esp. the figure of the two eyes, is strong.