# Urban II — Speech at Council of Clermont (Five Versions)

_Internet Medieval Sourcebook — Fordham University compilation_

Six Versions of the Speech

Versions by:

- Fulcher of Chartres: Gesta Francorum
 Jerusalem Expugnantium
- Robert the Monk: Historia Hierosolymitana
- Gesta Francorum [The Deeds of
 the Franks]
- Balderic of Dol
- Guibert de Nogent: Historia quae
 dicitur Gesta Dei per Francos
- Urban II: Letter of Instruction, December
 1095
1. Fulcher of Chartres

Most beloved brethren: Urged by necessity, I, Urban, by the permission
 of God chief bishop and prelate over the whole world, have come
 into these parts as an ambassador with a divine admonition to
 you, the servants of God. I hoped to find you as faithful and
 as zealous in the service of God as I had supposed you to be.
 But if there is in you any deformity or crookedness contrary to
 God's law, with divine help I will do my best to remove it. For
 God has put you as stewards over his family to minister to it.
 Happy indeed will you be if he finds you faithful in your stewardship.
 You are called shepherds; see that you do not act as hirelings.
 But be true shepherds, with your crooks always in your hands.
 Do not go to sleep, but guard on all sides the flock committed
 to you. For if through your carelessness or negligence a wolf
 carries away one of your sheep, you will surely lose the reward
 laid up for you with God. And after you have been bitterly scourged
 with remorse for your faults-, you will be fiercely overwhelmed
 in hell, the abode of death. For according to the gospel you are
 the salt of the earth [Matt. 5:13]. But if you fall short in your
 duty, how, it may be asked, can it be salted? O how great the
 need of salting! It is indeed necessary for you to correct with
 the salt of wisdom this foolish people which is so devoted to
 the pleasures of this -world, lest the Lord, when He may wish
 to speak to them, find them putrefied by their sins unsalted and
 stinking. For if He, shall find worms, that is, sins, In them,
 because you have been negligent in your duty, He will command
 them as worthless to be thrown into the abyss of unclean things.
 And because you cannot restore to Him His great loss, He will
 surely condemn you and drive you from His loving presence. But
 the man who applies this salt should be prudent, provident, modest,
 learned, peaceable, watchful, pious, just, equitable, and pure.
 For how can the ignorant teach others? How can the licentious
 make others modest? And how can the impure make others pure? If
 anyone hates peace, how can he make others peaceable ? Or if anyone
 has soiled his hands with baseness, how can he cleanse the impurities
 of another? We read also that if the blind lead the blind, both
 will fall into the ditch [Matt. 15:14]. But first correct yourselves,
 in order that, free from blame , you may be able to correct those
 who are subject to you. If you wish to be the friends of God,
 gladly do the things which you know will please Him. You must
 especially let all matters that pertain to the church be controlled
 by the law of the church. And be careful that simony does not
 take root among you, lest both those who buy and those who sell
 [church offices] be beaten with the scourges of the Lord through
 narrow streets and driven into the place of destruction and confusion.
 Keep the church and the clergy in all its grades entirely free
 from the secular power. See that the tithes that belong to God
 are faithfully paid from all the produce of the land; let them
 not be sold or withheld. If anyone seizes a bishop let him be
 treated as an outlaw. If anyone seizes or robs monks, or clergymen,
 or nuns, or their servants, or pilgrims, or merchants, let him
 be anathema [that is, cursed]. Let robbers and incendiaries and
 all their accomplices be expelled from the church and anthematized.
 If a man who does not give a part of his goods as alms is punished
 with the damnation of hell, how should he be punished who robs
 another of his goods? For thus it happened to the rich man in
 the gospel [Luke 16:19]; he was not punished because he had stolen
 the goods of another, but because he had not used well the things
 which were his.

"You have seen for a long time the great disorder in the
 world caused by these crimes. It is so bad in some of your provinces,
 I am told, and you are so weak in the administration of justice,
 that one can hardly go along the road by day or night without
 being attacked by robbers; and whether at home or abroad one is
 in danger of being despoiled either by force or fraud. Therefore
 it is necessary to reenact the truce, as it is commonly called,
 which was proclaimed a long time ago by our holy fathers. I exhort
 and demand that you, each, try hard to have the truce kept in
 your diocese. And if anyone shall be led by his cupidity or arrogance
 to break this truce, by the authority of God and with the sanction
 of this council he shall be anathematized."

After these and various other matters had been attended to, all
 who were present, clergy and people, gave thanks to God and agreed
 to the pope's proposition. They all faithfully promised to keep
 the decrees. Then the pope said that in another part of the world
 Christianity was suffering from a state of affairs that was worse
 than the one just mentioned. He continued:

"Although, O sons of God, you have promised more firmly than
 ever to keep the peace among yourselves and to preserve the rights
 of the church, there remains still an important work for you to
 do. Freshly quickened by the divine correction, you must apply
 the strength of your righteousness to another matter which concerns
 you as well as God. For your brethren who live in the east are
 in urgent need of your help, and you must hasten to give them
 the aid which has often been promised them. For, as the most of
 you have heard, the Turks and Arabs have attacked them and have
 conquered the territory of Romania [the Greek empire] as far west
 as the shore of the Mediterranean and the Hellespont, which is
 called the Arm of St. George. They have occupied more and more
 of the lands of those Christians, and have overcome them in seven
 battles. They have killed and captured many, and have destroyed
 the churches and devastated the empire. If you permit them to
 continue thus for awhile with impurity, the faithful of God will
 be much more widely attacked by them. On this account I, or rather
 the Lord, beseech you as Christ's heralds to publish this everywhere
 and to persuade all people of whatever rank, foot-soldiers and
 knights, poor and rich, to carry aid promptly to those Christians
 and to destroy that vile race from the lands of our friends. I
 say this to those who are present, it meant also for those who
 are absent. Moreover, Christ commands it.

"All who die by the way, whether by land or by sea, or in
 battle against the pagans, shall have immediate remission of sins.
 This I grant them through the power of God with which I am invested.
 O what a disgrace if such a despised and base race, which worships
 demons, should conquer a people which has the faith of omnipotent
 God and is made glorious with the name of Christ! With what reproaches
 will the Lord overwhelm us if you do not aid those who, with us,
 profess the Christian religion! Let those who have been accustomed
 unjustly to wage private warfare against the faithful now go against
 the infidels and end with victory this war which should have been
 begun long ago. Let those who for a long time, have been robbers,
 now become knights. Let those who have been fighting against their
 brothers and relatives now fight in a proper way against the barbarians.
 Let those who have been serving as mercenaries for small pay now
 obtain the eternal reward. Let those who have been wearing themselves
 out in both body and soul now work for a double honor. Behold!
 on this side will be the sorrowful and poor, on that, the rich;
 on this side, the enemies of the Lord, on that, his friends. Let
 those who go not put off the journey, but rent their lands and
 collect money for their expenses; and as soon as winter is over
 and spring comes, let hem eagerly set out on the way with God
 as their guide."

2. Robert the Monk

Oh, race of Franks, race from across the mountains, race chosen
 and beloved by Godas shines forth in very many of your works set
 apart from all nations by the situation of your country, as well
 as by your catholic faith and the honor of the holy church! To
 you our discourse is addressed and for you our exhortation is
 intended. We wish you to know what a grievous cause has led us
 to Your country, what peril threatening you and all the faithful
 has brought us.

From the confines of Jerusalem and the city of Constantinople
 a horrible tale has gone forth and very frequently has been brought
 to our ears, namely, that a race from the kingdom of the Persians,
 an accursed race, a race utterly alienated from God, a generation
 forsooth which has not directed its heart and has not entrusted
 its spirit to God, has invaded the lands of those Christians and
 has depopulated them by the sword, pillage and fire; it has led
 away a part of the captives into its own country, and a part it
 has destroyed by cruel tortures; it has either entirely destroyed
 the churches of God or appropriated them for the rites of its
 own religion. They destroy the altars, after having defiled them
 with their uncleanness. They circumcise the Christians, and the
 blood of the circumcision they either spread upon the altars or
 pour into the vases of the baptismal font. When they wish to torture
 people by a base death, they perforate their navels, and dragging
 forth the extremity of the intestines, bind it to a stake; then
 with flogging they lead the victim around until the viscera having
 gushed forth the victim falls prostrate upon the ground. Others
 they bind to a post and pierce with arrows. Others they compel
 to extend their necks and then, attacking them with naked swords,
 attempt to cut through the neck with a single blow. What shall
 I say of the abominable rape of the women? To speak of it is worse
 than to be silent. The kingdom of the Greeks is now dismembered
 by them and deprived of territory so vast in extent that it can
 not be traversed in a march of two months. On whom therefore is
 the labor of avenging these wrongs and of recovering this territory
 incumbent, if not upon you? You, upon whom above other nations
 God has conferred remarkable glory in arms, great courage, bodily
 activity, and strength to humble the hairy scalp of those who
 resist you.

Let the deeds of your ancestors move you and incite your minds
 to manly achievements; the glory and greatness of king Charles
 the Great, and of his son Louis, and of your other kings, who
 have destroyed the kingdoms of the pagans, and have extended in
 these lands the territory of the holy church. Let the holy sepulchre
 of the Lord our Saviour, which is possessed by unclean nations,
 especially incite you, and the holy places which are now treated
 with ignominy and irreverently polluted with their filthiness.
 Oh, most valiant soldiers and descendants of invincible ancestors,
 be not degenerate, but recall the valor of your progenitors.

But if you are hindered by love of children, parents and wives,
 remember what the Lord says in the Gospel, "He that loveth
 father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me." "Every
 one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
 or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my name's sake shall
 receive an hundredfold and shall inherit everlasting life."
 Let none of your possessions detain you, no solicitude for your
 family affairs, since this land which you inhabit, shut in on
 all sides by the seas and surrounded by the mountain peaks, is
 too narrow for your large population; nor does it abound in wealth;
 and it furnishes scarcely food enough for its cultivators. Hence
 it is that you murder one another, that you wage war, and that
 frequently you perish by mutual wounds. Let therefore hatred depart
 from among you, let your quarrels end, let wars cease, and let
 all dissensions and controversies slumber. Enter upon the road
 to the Holy Sepulchre; wrest that land from the wicked race, and
 subject it to yourselves. That land which as the Scripture says
 "floweth with milk and honey," was given by God into
 the possession of the children of Israel Jerusalem is the navel
 of the world; the land is fruitful above others, like another
 paradise of delights. This the Redeemer of the human race has
 made illustrious by His advent, has beautified by residence, has
 consecrated by suffering, has redeemed by death, has glorified
 by burial. This royal city, therefore, situated at the centre
 of the world, is now held captive by His enemies, and is in subjection
 to those who do not know God, to the worship of the heathens.
 She seeks therefore and desires to be liberated, and does not
 cease to implore you to come to her aid. From you especially she
 asks succor, because, as we have already said, God has conferred
 upon you above all nations great glory in arms. Accordingly undertake
 this journey for the remission of your sins, with the assurance
 of the imperishable glory of the kingdom of heaven.

When Pope Urban had said these and very many similar things in
 his urbane discourse, he so influenced to one purpose the desires
 of all who were present, that they cried out, "It is the
 will of God! It is the will of God!" When the venerable Roman
 pontiff heard that, with eyes uplifted to heaven he gave thanks
 to God and, with his hand commanding silence, said:

Most beloved brethren, today is manifest in you what the Lord
 says in the Gospel, "Where two or three are gathered together
 in my name there am I in the midst of them." Unless the Lord
 God had been present in your spirits, all of you would not have
 uttered the same cry. For, although the cry issued from numerous
 mouths, yet the origin of the cry was one. Therefore I say to
 you that God, who implanted this in your breasts, has drawn it
 forth from you. Let this then be your war-cry in combats, because
 this word is given to you by God. When an armed attack is made
 upon the enemy, let this one cry be raised by all the soldiers
 of God: It is the will of God! It is the will of God!

And we do not command or advise that the old or feeble, or those
 unfit for bearing arms, undertake this journey; nor ought women
 to set out at all, without their husbands or brothers or legal
 guardians. For such are more of a hindrance than aid, more of
 a burden than advantage. Let the rich aid the needy; and according
 to their wealth, let them take with them experienced soldiers.
 The priests and clerks of any order are not to go without the
 consent of their bishop; for this journey would profit them nothing
 if they went without permission of these. Also, it is not fitting
 that laymen should enter upon the pilgrimage without the blessing
 of their priests.

Whoever, therefore, shall determine upon this holy pilgrimage
 and shall make his vow to God to that effect and shall offer himself
 to Him as a, living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, shall
 wear the sign of the cross of the Lord on his forehead or on his
 breast. When,' truly',' having fulfilled his vow be wishes to
 return, let him place the cross on his back between his shoulders.
 Such, indeed, by the twofold action will fulfill the precept of
 the Lord, as He commands in the Gospel, "He that taketh not
 his cross and followeth after me, is not worthy of me."

3. The Gesta Version

When now that time was at hand which the Lord Jesus daily points
 out to His faithful, especially in the Gospel, saying, "If
 any man would come after me, let him deny himself and take up
 his cross and follow me," a mighty agitation was carried
 on throughout all the region of Gaul. (Its tenor was) that if
 anyone desired to follow the Lord zealously, with a pure heart
 and mind, and wished faithfully to bear the cross after Him, he
 would no longer hesitate to take up the way to the Holy Sepulchre.

And so Urban, Pope of the Roman see, with his archbishops, bishops,
 abbots, and priests, set out as quickly as possible beyond the
 mountains and began to deliver sermons and to preach eloquently,
 saying: "Whoever wishes to save his soul should not hesitate
 humbly to take up the way of the Lord, and if he lacks sufficient
 money, divine mercy will give him enough." Then the apostolic
 lord continued, "Brethren, we ought to endure much suffering
 for the name of Christ - misery, poverty, nakedness, persecution,
 want, illness, hunger, thirst, and other (ills) of this kind,
 just as the Lord saith to His disciples: 'Ye must suffer much
 in My name,' and 'Be not ashamed to confess Me before the faces
 of men; verily I will give you mouth and wisdom,' and finally,
 'Great is your reward in Heaven."' And when this speech had
 already begun to be noised abroad, little by little, through all
 the regions and countries of Gaul, the Franks, upon hearing such
 reports, forthwith caused crosses to be sewed on their right shoulders,
 saying that they followed with one accord the footsteps of Christ,
 by which they had been redeemed from the hand of hell.

4. Version of Balderic of Dol

. . . "We have beard, most beloved brethren, and you have
 heard what we cannot recount without deep sorrow how, with great
 hurt and dire sufferings our Christian brothers, members in Christ,
 are scourged, oppressed, and injured in Jerusalem, in Antioch,
 and the other cities of the East. Your own blood brothers, your
 companions, your associates (for you are sons of the same Christ
 and the same Church) are either subjected in their inherited homes
 to other masters, or are driven from them, or they come as beggars
 among us; or, which is far worse, they are flogged and exiled
 as slaves for sale in their own land. Christian blood, redeemed
 by the blood of Christ, has been shed, and Christian flesh, akin
 to the flesh of Christ, has been subjected to unspeakable degradation
 and servitude. Everywhere in those cities there is sorrow, everywhere
 misery, everywhere groaning (I say it with a sigh). The churches
 in which divine mysteries were celebrated in olden times are now,
 to our sorrow, used as stables for the animals of these people!
 Holy men do not possess those cities; nay, base and bastard Turks
 hold sway over our brothers. The blessed Peter first presided
 as Bishop at Antioch; behold, in his own church the Gentiles have
 established their superstitions, and the Christian religion, which
 they ought rather to cherish, they have basely shut out from the
 ball dedicated to God! The estates given for the support of the
 saints and the patrimony of nobles set aside for the sustenance
 of the poor are subject to pagan tyranny, while cruel masters
 abuse for their own purposes the returns from these lands. The
 priesthood of God has been ground down into the dust. The sanctuary
 of God (unspeakable shamel) is everywhere profaned. Whatever Christians
 still remain in hiding there are sought out with unheard of tortures.

"Of holy Jerusalem, brethren, we dare not speak, for we are
 exceedingly afraid and ashamed to speak of it. This very city,
 in which, as you all know, Christ Himself suffered for us, because
 our sins demanded it, has been reduced to the pollution of paganism
 and, I say it to our disgrace, withdrawn from the service of God.
 Such is the heap of reproach upon us who have so much deserved
 it! Who now serves the church of the Blessed Mary in the valley
 of Josaphat, in which church she herself was buried in body? But
 why do we pass over the Temple of Solomon, nay of the Lord, in
 which the barbarous nations placed their idols contrary to law,
 human and divine? Of the Lord's Sepulchre we have refrained from
 speaking, since some of you with your own eyes have seen to what
 abominations it has been given over. The Turks violently took
 from it the offerings which you brought there for alms in such
 vast amounts, and, in addition, they scoffed much and often 'at
 Your religion. And yet in that place (I say only what you already
 know) rested the Lord; there He died for us; there He was buried.
 How precious would be the longed for, incomparable place of the
 Lord's burial, even if God failed there to perform the yearly
 miracle! For in the days of His Passion all the lights in the
 Sepulchre and round about in the church, which have been extinguished,
 are relighted by divine command. Whose heart is so stony, brethren,
 that it is not touched by so great a miracle? Believe me, that
 man is bestial and senseless whose heart such divinely manifest
 grace does not move to faith! And yet the Gentiles see this in
 common with the Christians and are not turned from their ways!
 They are, indeed, afraid, but they are not converted to the faith;
 nor is it to be wondered at, for a blindness of mind rules over
 them. With what afflictions they wronged you who have returned
 and are now present, you yourselves know too well you who there
 sacrificed your substance and your blood for God.

"This, beloved brethren, we shall say, that we may have you
 as witness of our words. More suffering of our brethren and devastation
 of churches remains than we can speak of one by one, for we are
 oppressed by tears and groans, sighs and sobs. We weep and wail,
 brethren, alas, like the Psalmist, in our inmost heart! We are
 wretched and unhappy, and in us is that prophecy fulfilled: 'God,
 the nations are come into thine inheritance; thy holy temple have
 they defiled; they have laid Jerusalem in heaps; the dead bodies
 of thy servants have been given to be food for the birds of the
 heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth.
 Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and
 there was none to bury them.' Woe unto us, brethren! We who have
 already become a reproach to our neighbors, a scoffing, and derision
 to them round about us, let us at least with tears condone and
 have compassion upon our brothers! We who are become the scorn
 of all peoples, and worse than all, let us bewail the most monstrous
 devastation of the Holy Land! This land we have deservedly called
 holy in which there is not even a footstep that the body or spirit
 of the Saviour did not render glorious and blessed which embraced
 the holy presence of the mother of God, and the meetings of the
 apostles, and drank up the blood of the martyrs shed there. How
 blessed are the stones which crowned you Stephen, the first martyr!
 How happy, O, John the Baptist, the waters of the Jordan which
 served you in baptizing the Saviour! The children of Israel, who
 were led out of Egypt, and who prefigured you in the crossing
 of the Red Sea, have taken that land, by their arms, with Jesus
 as leader; they have driven out the Jebusites and other inhabitants
 and have themselves inhabited earthly Jerusalem, the image of
 celestial Jerusalem.

"What are we saying? Listen and learn! You, girt about with
 the badge of knighthood, are arrogant with great pride; you rage
 against your brothers and cut each other in pieces. This is not
 the (true) soldiery of Christ which rends asunder the sheepfold
 of the Redeemer. The Holy Church has reserved a soldiery for herself
 to help her people, but you debase her wickedly to her hurt. Let
 us confess the truth, whose heralds we ought to be; truly, you
 are not holding to the way which leads to life. You, the oppressers
 of children, plunderers of widows; you, guilty of homicide, of
 sacrilege, robbers of another's rights; you who await the pay
 of thieves for the shedding of Christian blood -- as vultures
 smell fetid corpses, so do you sense battles from afar and rush
 to them eagerly. Verily, this is the worst way, for it is utterly
 removed from God! if, forsooth, you wish to be mindful of your
 souls, either lay down the girdle of such knighthood, or advance
 boldly, as knights of Christ, and rush as quickly as you can to
 the defence of the Eastern Church. For she it is from whom the
 joys of your whole salvation have come forth, who poured into
 your mouths the milk of divine wisdom, who set before you the
 holy teachings of the Gospels. We say this, brethren, that you
 may restrain your murderous hands from the destruction of your
 brothers, and in behalf of your relatives in the faith oppose
 yourselves to the Gentiles. Under Jesus Christ, our Leader, may
 you struggle for your Jerusalem, in Christian battleline, most
 invincible line, even more successfully than did the sons of Jacob
 of old - struggle, that you may assail and drive out the Turks,
 more execrable than the Jebusites, who are in this land, and may
 you deem it a beautiful thing to die for Christ in that city in
 which He died for us. But if it befall you to die this side of
 it, be sure that to have died on the way is of equal value, if
 Christ shall find you in His army. God pays with the same shilling,
 whether at the first or eleventh hour. You should shudder, brethren,
 you should shudder at raising a violent hand against Christians;
 it is less wicked to brandish your sword against Saracens. It
 is the only warfare that is righteous, for it is charity to risk
 your life for your brothers. That you may not be troubled about
 the concerns of tomorrow, know that those who fear God want nothing,
 nor those who cherish Him in truth. The possessions of the enemy,
 too, will be yours, since you will make spoil of their treasures
 and return victorious to your own; or empurpled with your own
 blood, you will have gained everlasting glory. For such a Commander
 you ought to fight, for One who lacks neither might nor wealth
 with which to reward you.

Short is the way, little the labor, which, nevertheless, will
 repay you with the crown that fadeth not away. Accordingly, we
 speak with the authority of the prophet: 'Gird thy sword upon
 thy thigh O mighty one.' Gird yourselves, everyone of you, I say,
 and be valiant sons; for it is better for you to die in battle
 than to behold, the sorrows of your race and of your holy places.
 Let neither property nor the alluring charms of your wives entice
 you frol going; nor let the trials that are to be borne so deter
 you that you remain here."

And turning to the bishops, he said, "You, brothers and fellow
 bishops; you, fellow priests and sharers with us in Christ, make
 this same announcement through the churches committed to you,
 and with your whole soul vigorously preach the journey to Jerusalem.
 When they have confessed the disgrace of their sins, do you, secure
 in Christ, grant them speedy pardon. Moreover, you who are to
 go shall have us praying for you; we shall have you fighting for
 God's people. It is our duty to pray, yours to fight against the
 Amalekites. With Moses, we shall extend unwearied hands in prayer
 to Heaven, while you go forth and brandish the sword, like dauntless
 warriors, against Amalek."

As those present were thus clearly informed by these and other
 words of this kind from the apostolic lord, the eyes of some were
 bathed in tears; some trembled, and yet others discussed the matter.
 However, in the presence of all at that same council, and as we
 looked on, the Bishop of Puy, a man of great renown and of highest
 ability, went to the Pope with joyful countenance and on bended
 knee sought and entreated blessing and permission to go., Over
 and above this, he won from the Pope the command that all should
 obey him, and that he should hold sway over all the army in behalf
 of the Pope, since all knew him to be a prelate of unusual energy
 and industry.

5. Version of Guibert de Nogent

"If among the churches scattered about over the whole world
 some, because of persons or location, deserve reverence above
 others (for persons, I say, since greater privileges are accorded
 to apostolic sees; for places, indeed, since the same dignity
 which is accorded to persons is also shown to regal cities, such
 as Constantinople), we owe most to that church from which we received
 the grace of redemption and the source of all Christianity. If
 what the Lord saysnamely, 'Salvation is from the Jews,' accords
 with the truth, and it is true that the Lord has left us Sabaoth
 as seed, that we may not become like Sodom and Gomorrah, and our
 seed is Christ, in whom is the salvation and benediction of all
 peoples, then, indeed, the very land and city in which He dwelt
 and suffered is, by witnesses of the Scriptures, holy. If this
 land is spoken of in the sacred writings of the prophets as the
 inheritance and the holy temple of God before ever the Lord walked
 about in it, or was revealed, what sanctity, what reverence has
 it not acquired since God in His majesty was there clothed in
 the flesh, nourished, grew up, and in bodily form there walked
 about, or was carried about; and, to compress in fitting brevity
 all that might be told in a long series of words, since there
 the blood of the Son of God, more holy than heaven and earth,
 was poured forth, and His body, its quivering members dead, rested
 in the tomb. What veneration do we think it deserves? If, when
 the Lord had but just been crucified and the city was still held
 by the Jews, it was called holy by the evangelist when he says,
 'Many bodies of the saints that had fallen asleep were raised;
 and coming forth out of the tombs after His resurrection, they
 entered into the holy city and appeared unto many,' and by the
 prophet Isaiah when be says, 'It shall be His glorious sepulchre,'
 then, surely, with this sanctity placed upon it by God the Sanctifier
 Himself, no evil that may befall it can destroy it, and in the
 same way glory is indivisibly fixed to His Sepulchre. Most beloved
 brethren, if you reverence the source of that holiness and I .
 you cherish these shrines which are the marks of His footprints
 on earth, if you seek (the way), God leading you, God fighting
 in your behalf, you should strive with your utmost efforts to
 cleanse the Holy City and the glory of the Sepulchre, now polluted
 by the concourse of the Gentiles, as much as is in their power.

"If in olden times the Maccabees attained to the highest
 praise of piety because they fought for the ceremonies and the
 Temple, it is also justly granted you, Christian soldiers, to
 defend their liberty of your country by armed endeavor. If you,
 likewise, consider that the abode of the holy apostles and any
 other saints should be striven for with such effort, why do you
 refuse to rescue the Cross, the Blood, the Tomb? Why do you refuse
 to visit them, to spend the price of your lives in rescuing them?
 You have thus far waged unjust wars, at one time and another;
 you have brandished mad weapons to your mutual destruction, for
 no other reason than covetousness and pride, as a result of which
 you have deserved eternal death and sure damnation. We now hold
 out to you wars which contain the glorious reward of martyrdom,
 which will retain that title of praise now and forever.

"Let us suppose, for the moment, that Christ was not dead
 and buried, and had never lived any length of time in Jerusalem.
 Surely, if all this were lacking, this fact alone ought still
 to arouse you to go to the aid of the land and city -- the fact
 that 'Out of Zion shall go forth the law and the word of Jehovah
 from Jerusalem!' If all that there is of Christian preaching has
 flowed from the fountain of Jerusalem, its streams, whithersoever
 spread out over the whole world, encircle the hearts of the Catholic
 multitude, that they may consider wisely what they owe such a
 well-watered fountain. If rivers return to the place whence they
 have issued only to flow forth again, according to the saying
 of Solomon, it ought to seem glorious to you to be able to apply
 a new cleansing to this place, whence it is certain that you received
 the cleansing of baptism and the witness of your faith.

"And you ought, furthermore, to consider with the utmost
 deliberation, if by your labors, God working through you, it should
 occur that the Mother of churches should flourish anew to the
 worship of Christianity, whether, perchance, He may not wish other
 regions of the East to be restored to the faith against the approaching
 time of the Antichrist. For it is clear that Antichrist is to
 do battle not with the Jews, not with the Gentiles; but, according
 to the etymology of his name, He will attack Christians. And if
 Antichrist finds there no Christians (just as at present when
 scarcely any dwell there), no one will be there to oppose him,
 or whom he may rightly overcome. According to Daniel and Jerome,
 the interpreter of Daniel, he is to fix his tents on the Mount
 of Olives; and it is certain, for the apostle teaches it, that
 he will sit at Jerusalem in the Temple of the Lord, as though
 he were God. And according to the same prophet, he will first
 kill three kings of Egypt, Africa, and Ethiopia, without doubt
 for their Christian faith: This, indeed, could not at all be done
 unless Christianity was established where now is paganism. If,
 therefore, you are zealous in the practice of holy battles, in
 order that, just as you have received the seed of knowledge of
 God from Jerusalem, you may in the same way restore the borrowed
 grace, so that through you the Catholic name may be advanced to
 oppose the perfidy of the Antichrist and the Antichristians then,
 who can not conjecture that God, who has exceeded the hope of
 all, will consume, in the abundance of your courage and through
 you as the spark, such a thicket of paganism as to include within
 His law Egypt, Africa, and Ethiopia, which have withdrawn from
 the communion of our belief? And the man of sin, the son of perdition,
 will find some to oppose him. Behold, the Gospel cries out, 'Jerusalem
 shall be trodden down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles
 be fulfilled.' 'Times of the Gentiles' can be understood in two
 ways: Either that they have ruled over the Christians at their
 pleasure, and have gladly frequented the sloughs of all baseness
 for the satisfaction of their lusts, and in all this have had
 no obstacle (for they who have everything according to their wish
 are said to have their time; there is that saying: 'My time is
 not yet come, but your time is always ready,' whence the lustful
 are wont to say 'you are having your time'). Or, again, 'the times
 of the Gentiles' are the fulness of time for those Gentiles who
 shall have entered secretly before Israel shall be saved. These
 times, most beloved brothers, will now, forsooth, be fulfilled,
 provided the might of the pagans be repulsed through You, with
 the cooperation of God. With the end of the world already near,
 even though the Gentiles fail to be converted t the Lord (since
 according to the apostle there must be a withdrawal from the faith),
 it is first necessary, according to their prophecy, that the Christian
 sway be renewed in those regions either through you, or others,
 whom it shall please God to send before the coming of Antichrist,
 so that the head of all evil, who is to occupy there the throne
 of the kingdom, shall find some support of the faith to fight
 against him.

"Consider, therefore, that the Almighty has provided you,
 perhaps, for this purpose, that through you He may restore Jerusalem
 from such debasement. Ponder, I beg you, how full of joy and delight
 our hearts will be when we shall see the Holy City restored with
 your little help, and the prophet's, nay divine, words fulfilled
 in our times. Let your memory be moved by what the Lord Himself
 says to the Church: 'I will bring thy seed from the East and gather
 thee from the West.' God has already brought our, seed from the
 East, since in a double way that region of the East has given
 the first beginnings of the Church to us. But from the West He
 will also gather it, provided He repairs the wrongs of 1 Jerusalem
 through those who have begun the witness of the final faith, that
 is the people of the West. With God's assistance, we think this
 can be done through you.

"If neither the words of the Scriptures arouse you, nor our
 admonitions penetrate your minds, at least let the great suffering
 of those who desired to go to the holy places stir you up. Think
 of those who made the pilgrimage across the sea! Even if they
 were more wealthy, consider what taxes, what violence they underwent,
 since they were forced to make payments and tributes almost every
 mile, to purchase release at every gate of the city, at the entrance
 of the churches and temples, at every side journey from place
 to place: also, if any accusation whatsoever were made against
 them, they were compelled to purchase their release; but if they
 refused to pay money, the prefects of the Gentiles, according
 to their custom, urged them fiercely with blows. What shall we
 say of those who took up the journey without anything more than
 trust in their barren poverty, since they seemed to have nothing
 except their bodies to lose? They not only demanded money of them,
 which is not an unendurable punishment, but also examined the
 callouses of their heels, cutting them open and folding the skin
 back, lest, perchance, they had sewed something there. Their unspeakable
 cruelty was carried on even to the point of giving them scammony
 to drink until they vomited, or even burst their bowels, because
 they thought the wretches had swallowed gold or silver; or, horrible
 to say, they cut their bowels open with a sword and, spreading
 out the folds of the intestines, with frightful mutilation disclosed
 whatever nature held there in secret. Remember, I pray, the thousands
 who have perished vile deaths, and strive for the holy places
 from which the beginnings of your faith have come. Before you
 engage in His battles, believe without question that Christ will
 be your standard-bearer and inseparable forerunner."

The most excellent man concluded his oration and by the power
 of the blessed Peter. absolved all who vowed to go and confirmed
 those acts with apostolic blessing. He instituted a sign well
 suited t so honorable a profession by making the figure of the
 Cross, the stigma of the Lord's Passion, the emblem of the soldiery,
 or rather, of what was to be the soldiery of God. This, made of
 any kind of cloth, he ordered to be sewed upon the shirts, cloaks,
 and byrra of those who were about to go. He commanded that
 if anyone, after receiving this emblem, or after taking openly
 this vow, should shrink from his good intent through base change
 of heart, or any affection for his parents, he should be regarded
 an outlaw forever, unless he repented and again undertook whatever
 of his pledge he had omitted. Furthermore, the Pope condemned
 with a fearful anathema all those who dared to molest the wives,
 children, and possessions of these who were going on this journey
 for God. . . .

6. Urban II: Letter of Instruction
 to the Crusaders, December 1095

Urban, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to all the faithful,
 both princes and subjects, waiting in Flanders; greeting, apostolic
 grace, and blessing.

Your brotherhood, we believe, has long since learned from many
 accounts that a barbaric fury has deplorably afflicted an laid
 waste the churches of God in the regions of the Orient. More than
 this, blasphemous to say, it has even grasped in intolerabe servitude
 its churches and the Holy City of Christ, glorified b His passion
 and resurrection. Grieving with pious concern at this calamity,
 we visited the regions of Gaul and devoted ourselves largely to
 urging the princes of the land and their subjects to free the
 churches of the East. We solemnly enjoined upon them at the council
 of Auvergne (the accomplishment of) such an undertaking, as a
 preparation for the remission of all their sins. And we have constituted
 our most beloved son, Adhemar, Bishop of Puy, leader of this expedition
 and undertaking in our stead, so that those who, perchance, may
 wish to undertake this journey should comply With his commands,
 as if they were our own, and submit fully to his loosings or bindings,
 as far as shall seem to belong to such an office. If, moreover,
 there are any of your people whom God has inspired to this vow,
 let them know that he (Adhemar) will set out with the aid of God
 on the day of the Assumption of the Blessed Mary, and that they
 can then attach themselves to his following.

- Fulcher of Chartres: Gesta Francorum Jerusalem Expugnantium 
 Bongars, Gesta Dei per Francos, 1, pp. 382 f., trans in
 Oliver J. Thatcher, and Edgar Holmes McNeal, eds., A Source
 Book for Medieval History, (New York: Scribners, 1905), 513-17
- Robert the Monk: Historia Hierosolymitana. in [RHC,
 Occ III.]
 Dana C. Munro, "Urban and the Crusaders", Translations and Reprints from the Original Sources of
 European History, Vol 1:2, (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania,
 1895), 5-8
- Gesta Francorum [The Deeds of the Franks]
 August. C. Krey, The First Crusade: The Accounts of Eyewitnesses
 and Participants, (Princeton: 1921), 28-30
- Balderic of Dol
 August. C. Krey, The First Crusade: The Accounts of Eyewitnesses
 and Participants, (Princeton: 1921), 23-36
- Guibert de Nogent: Historia quae dicitur Gesta Dei per
 Francos [RHC.Occ. IV]
 August. C. Krey, The First Crusade: The Accounts of Eyewitnesses
 and Participants, (Princeton: 1921), 36-40
- Urban II: Letter of Instruction, December
 1095
 August. C. Krey, The First Crusade: The Accounts of Eyewitnesses
 and Participants, (Princeton: 1921), 42-43
This text is part of the Internet Medieval Source Book.
 The Sourcebook is a collection of public domain and copy-permitted
 texts related to medieval and Byzantine history.

Unless otherwise indicated the specific electronic form of the
 document is copyright. Permission is granted for electronic copying,
 distribution in print form for educational purposes and personal
 use. If you do reduplicate the document, indicate the source.
 No permission is granted for commercial use.

&copy;Paul Halsall, Dec 1997. [Emendation from "five" to six" Versions made 6 Feb 2023-
 [email protected]

The Internet History Sourcebooks Project is located at the History Department of Fordham University, New York. The Internet
 Medieval Sourcebook, and other medieval components of the project, are located at
 the Fordham University Center
 for Medieval Studies.The IHSP recognizes the contribution of Fordham University, the
 Fordham University History Department, and the Fordham Center for Medieval Studies in
 providing web space and server support for the project. The IHSP is a project independent of Fordham University. Although the IHSP seeks to follow all applicable copyright law, Fordham University is not
 the institutional owner, and is not liable as the result of any legal action.
 
 
 &copy; Site Concept and Design: Paul Halsall created 26 Jan 1996: latest revision 15 May 2026 [CV]