Book
VII.

Epistle II.

To Columbus, Bishop.

Gregory to Columbus, Bishop of Numidia.

We received at the hands of the bearer, your deacon, the
epistle of your Fraternity, in which you informed us of what had been
done among you with regard to the person of the bishop Paul.  This
has been done so late that he could not now have appeared here in
person.  For his Excellency also, our son Gennadius the Patrician,
sent his chancellor to us with reference to the same case.  But
when we had caused enquiry to be made whether he was willing to plead
against him [i.e. against the bishop Paul] before us, he replied that
he had been by no means sent with this intent but had only brought
hither certain three persons from his Church who would allege many
things against him.  While, then, we neither found him prepared to
commence an action, nor were moved by the quality of those persons to
regard them as fit accusers of a bishop, we could not gainsay or offer
hindrance to the often before-mentioned bishop Paul, who petitioned us
in the hope of having leave given him to resort to the royal city; but
we presently allowed him according to his petition, with two others
whom he should take with him, to set forth.  If, then, there have
been any things that could be reasonably said against him, the proper
course would have been for him to come here at once, and for your
Fraternity to inform us of all particulars, as you have now done. 
For, as to your having signified to us that you suffer from the
enmities of many on account of our frequently visiting you by our
letters, there is no doubt, most reverend brother, that the good suffer
from the grudges of the bad, and that those who are intent on divine
works are harassed by the oppositions of the perverse.  But, in
proportion as these bad things are around you, ought you to be more
instantly occupied with the care of the government committed to you,
and to watch for the custody of the flock of Christ; and in proportion
as the contrariety of unrighteous men presses upon you, ought the care
of pastoral solicitude to inflame you to be more active, and very
certain of the promised reward, to the end that you may be able to
offer to the chief Shepherd gain from the work given you to
do.

---

    On the subject
of this letter, see IV. 34, 35:  also VI. 63.

Epistle IV.

To Cyriacus, Bishop.

Gregory to Cyriacus, Bishop of Constantinople.

We have received with becoming charity our common
sons, George the presbyter and Theodore your deacon; and we rejoice
that you have passed from the care of ecclesiastical business to the
government of souls, since, according to the voice of the Truth, *He
that is faithful in a little will be faithful also in much*
(Luke xvi.
10).  And to the
servant who administers well it is said, *Because thou hast been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things*
(Matth. xxv.
23); to whom also it is
presently said further with respect to eternal retribution, *Enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.*  Now
you say in your letter that you had exceedingly wished for rest. 
But in this you shew that you have fitly assumed pastoral
responsibility, since, as a place of rule should be denied to those who
covet it, so it should be offered to those who fly from it. 
*And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of
God, as was Aaron* (Hebr. v. 4).  And again the same
excellent preacher says, *If one died far all, then all died; and
Christ died for all.  It remaineth that they which live should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and
rose again* (2 Cor.
v. 14, 15).  And
to the shepherd of holy Church it is said, *Simon, son of Jonas,
lovest thou me?  Feed My sheep* (John xxi. 17).  From which words it
appears that, if one who is able refuses to feed the sheep of Almighty
God, he shews that he does not love the chief
Shepherd.  For if the Only-begotten of the Father, for
accomplishing the good of all, came forth from the secrecy of the
Father into the midst of us, what shall we say, if we prefer our
secrecy to the good of our

neighbours?  Thus rest is to be
desired by us with all our heart; and yet for the advantage of many it
should sometimes be laid aside.  For, as we ought with full desire
to fly from occupation, so, if there should be a want of some one to
preach, we must needs put a willing shoulder under the burden of
occupation.  And this we are taught by the conduct of two
prophets, one of whom
attempted to shun the office of preaching, while the other desired
it.  For to the Lord who sent him
Jeremias replied saying, *Ah, Lord
God, I cannot speak; for I am a child*
(Jer. i. 6).  And when Almighty
God sought for some one to preach, saying,
*Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?* Isaias offered
himself of his own accord, saying, *Here am I, send me*
(Isai. vi.
8).  Lo, different
voices proceeded outwardly from the two, but they flowed from the same
fountain of love.

For indeed there are two precepts of charity; to
wit, the love of God and of one’s
neighbour.  Wherefore Isaias, wishing to profit his neighbours by
an active life, desires the office of preaching; but Jeremias, longing
to cling assiduously to the love of his Maker by a contemplative life,
protests against being sent to preach.  What, then, one laudably
desired the other laudably shrunk from:  the latter lest by
speaking he should lose the gains of silent contemplation; the former
lest by keeping silence he should feel the loss of diligent work. 
But this is nicely to be observed in both, that he who refused did not
resist finally, and he who wished to be sent saw himself previously
purged by a coal from the altar; that so no one who has not been purged
should dare to approach sacred ministries, nor any one whom heavenly
grace chooses refuse proudly under a show of humility.

Moreover I find you in your epistles seeking with
great longing after serenity of mind, and panting for tranquillity of
thought apart from perturbation.  But I know not in what manner
your Fraternity can attain to this.  For one who has undertaken
the pilotage of a ship must needs watch all the more as he further
recedes from shore, so as sometimes to foresee from signs the coming
storms; sometimes, when they come, either, if they are small, to ride
over them in a straight course, or, if they swell violently, to avoid
them as they rush on by steering sideways; and often to watch alone
when all who are without charge of the ship are at rest.  How,
moreover, having undertaken the burden of pastoral charge, can you have
serenity of thought, seeing that it is written, *Behold giants groan
under the waters* (Job xxvi. 5)?  For, according to the
words of John, *The waters are peoples* (Rev. xvii. 15).  And the groaning of giants
under the waters means that whoso in this world has increased in degree
of power, as though in a sort of massive size of body, feels the load
of greater tribulation by so much the more as he has taken on himself
the care of ruling peoples.  But, if the power of the Holy Spirit
breathes upon the afflicted mind, forthwith what was done bodily for
the people of Israel takes place with us spiritually.  For it is
written, *But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the
midst of the sea* (Exod. xiv. 29).  And through the prophet
the Lord promises saying, *When thou passest
through the waters, I will be with thee, and the rivers shall not
overflow thee* (Isai. xliii. 2).  For the rivers overflow those
whom the active business of this world confounds with perturbation of
mind.  But he who is sustained in mind by the grace of the Holy
Spirit passes through the waters, and yet is not overflowed by the
rivers, because in the midst of crowds of peoples he so proceeds along
his way as not to sink the head of his mind beneath the active business
of the world.

I also, who, unworthy as I am, have come to a
place of rule, had sometimes determined to seek some place of
retirement:  but, seeing the Divine counsels to be opposed to me,
I submitted the neck of my heart to my Maker’s yoke; especially
reflecting on this, that no hidden places whatever can save the soul
without the grace of God; and this we observe
sometimes, when even saints go astray.  For Lot was righteous in
the depraved city itself, and sinned on the mountain
(Gen. xix.).  But why speak of these
instances, when we know of greater ones?  For what is pleasanter
than Paradise?  What safer than Heaven?  And yet man out of
Paradise, and the angel from heaven, by sinning fell.  His power,
then, should be sought, His grace implored, without whom we are nowhere
without fault, with whom we are nowhere without righteousness.  We
should, then, take care that perturbation of thought get not the better
of our minds; for it can by no means be entirely got rid of.  For
whosoever is in a place of rule must needs have to think sometimes even
of earthly things, and to have a care also of external things, that the
flock committed to him may be able to subsist for accomplishing what it
has to do.  But it should be most carefully seen to, that this
same care pass not due measure, and that, when lawfully admitted into
the heart, it be not allowed to become excessive.  Whence

it is rightly said through
Ezekiel, *Let not the
priests shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long; but
polling let them poll their heads* (Ezek. xliv. 20).  For what are hairs in the
head by signification but thoughts in the mind?  For, rising above
the brain insensibly, they denote cares of the present life, which from
negligent perception, since they come on sometimes importunely, advance
as it were without our feeling them.  Since, then, all who are
over others ought indeed to have outward anxieties, and yet not to
devote themselves to them exceedingly, the priests are rightly
forbidden either to shave the head or to let their locks grow long, so
that they may neither entirely cut off from themselves carnal thoughts
for the life of their subjects, nor again allow them to grow too
much.  And it is also there well said, *Polling let them poll
their heads;* meaning that the anxieties of a temporal charge should
both proceed as far as is needful, and yet should be soon cut short,
lest they grow to an immoderate length.  While therefore both,
through external provision administered, the life of bodies is
protected, and again intentness of heart is not hindered through the
same being immoderate, the hairs on the head of the priest are kept to
cover the skin, and cut short so as not to veil the eyes.

Furthermore, we have received in full faith your
letters addressed to us, and give thanks to Almighty God, who, by the mutual confession of the faithful, guards
the coat that is without seam woven from the top throughout, that is to
say His Church, in the unity of grace, from all rent of error; and
against the deluge (so to speak) of so many sins of the perishing world
constructs an ark of many planks in which the elect of Almighty
God may be preserved unto life.  For,
when we in our turn send the confession of our faith to you, and you
shew your charity towards us, what are we doing in holy Church but
smearing the ark with pitch; lest any wave of error enter, and kill all
the spiritual as being men, and the carnal as being beasts.

But, when you have wisely professed a right faith,
it remains doubtless that you should keep the more warily the peace of
hearts, because of what the Truth says, *Have salt in yourselves, and
have peace one with another* (Mark ix. 50).  And Paul the apostle
admonishes, saying, *Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace* (Ephes. iv. 3).  And again he says,
*Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall
see God* (Hebr. xii. 14).  Which peace indeed you
will then truly have with us, if you turn away from the pride of a
profane name, according to what the same teacher of the Gentiles says,
*O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
profane novelties of words* (1 Tim. vi. 20).  For indeed it is too bad,
if these who have been made preachers of humility should glory in the
elation of a vain name, when the true preacher says, *But
God forbid that I should glory, save in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ*
(Gal. vi.
14.).  He then is
truly glorious who glories not in temporal power, but, for the name of
Christ, glories in His passion.  Herein therefore we embrace you
from the bottom of our heart, herein we recognize you as priests, if,
rejecting the vanity of words, you occupy the place of holiness with
holy humility.  For behold, we have been scandalized by this
impious appellation, and retain in our mind and express in words by no
means slight complaints.  But your Fraternity knows how the Truth
says, *If thou offerest thy gift before the altar, and there
rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave there thy
gift, and go thy way to be first reconciled to thy brother, and then
thou shalt come and offer thy gift* (Matth. v. 23, 24).  Herein is to be
considered, that, while every fault is done away by the offering of
sacrifice, so great is the evil of offence engendered in
another’s heart that from one who has so sinned the Lord accepts not the sacrifice itself which is wont to do
away sin.  Take heed then with speed to wipe off cause of offence
from your heart, that Almighty God may be able
to regard as acceptable the sacrifice of your offering.

Furthermore, while you have truly and accurately
professed the right faith, we find that among those whom you have held
to be condemned by the most holy general synods you have condemned a
certain Eudoxius; whose name we have not found mentioned in the Latin
language either in synods or in the books of the bishops of blessed
memory, Epiphanius, Augustin, or Philaster, whom we know to have been
the chief disputants against heretics.  Now if any one of the
catholic

Fathers
really condemns him, we undoubtedly follow their opinion.  If,
however, in your synodical epistle you have wished to condemn by name
those also who, apart from the holy synods, are condemned in the
writings of the Fathers, your Fraternity has mentioned too few by many;
but if those whom the general synods reject, then too many by this
one.  But in the midst of all these things it is to be remembered,
that in order that we may be free to profess the true faith and to
order whatever has to be done in peace and concord, we ought to pray
incessantly for the life of our most serene lords and of their
offspring, that Almighty God would subdue
barbarous nations under their feet, and grant them long and happy
lives, to the end that through a Christian empire the faith which is in
Christ may reign.

---

    What follows
about Isaiah and Jeremiah occurs also in the *Pastoralis Cura*, I.
7.

    The
following fanciful interpretation of Ezekiel’s direction to
priests is found also, almost word for word, in the *Pastoralis
Cura*, II. 7.  See note there.

    It is a sign of
Gregory’s scanty knowledge of the history of controversies that
so far he seems never to have heard of so noted an Arian leader as
Eudoxius, whose followers, under the name of Eudoxians, had been
specifically condemned in the 1st Canon of the first general Council of
Constantinople.  But it appears from a subsequent letter (VII.
34), that there was no copy at Rome of the canons of that Council,
which had not in fact been accepted there, probably because of the 3rd
Canon, which assigned a primacy of honour after Rome to the See of
Constantinople as being new Rome.  When he wrote this subsequent
letter, he had become aware that the Eudoxians had been so condemned,
but still had no idea who Eudoxius had been.  The fact was that he
was not well versed in past ecclesiastical history and, being totally
ignorant of Greek, could only consult such Latin writings as were
within his reach; and in these he had failed to find Eudoxius
mentioned.  He applied, however, to the patriarchs of Alexandria
and Antioch for further information on the subject (see VII. 34, and
VIII. 30), and was at length satisfied that Eudoxius had been a
veritable heretic, having been condemned by many Greek Fathers of
repute, and concluded that he was “manifestly slain, against whom
our heroes have cast so many darts” (VIII. 30).

Epistle
V.

To Cyriacus, Bishop.

Gregory to Cyriacus, Bishop of Constantinople.

When in time past I represented the Apostolic See
in the royal city, I became acquainted with the good qualities of your
Holiness.  And I greatly rejoice that the care of souls has been
committed to you.  And though unworthy, I beseech Almighty
God with all the prayers in my power that He
would even increase His grace in you, and cause you to gather gain of
souls for the eternal country.  But, whereas you say that you are
weak for this work that has been put upon you, we know that the first
virtue is acknowledgment of infirmity; and from this we gather that you
can fulfil well the ministry you have undertaken, that we see how, out
of humility, you acknowledge your own infirmity.  For we are all
infirm; but he is more infirm who has not strength to consider his
infirmity.  But you, most blessed brethren, are for this reason
strong, that, distrusting your own strength, you trust in the power of
Almighty God.

I cannot, however, express by the words of a
letter how much my heart is bound to your Charity.  But I pray
that Almighty God may by the gift of His grace
multiply the same charity that is between us, and may take away all
occasion of offence, lest the holy Church, united by the profession of
the true faith, and compacted by conjunction of the hearts of the
faithful, should suffer any damage from priests disputing with each
other, which God forbid.  I at any rate,
in all that I speak, in all that I say, against the proud conduct of
certain persons, still, through the bounty of Almighty God, never relinquish custody of inward charity; but so
execute outwardly what belongs to justice as by no means to disregard
inwardly what belongs to love and kindness.  And do you also ever
return my love, and guard what belongs to peace and kindness; that,
remaining of one mind, so as to allow no dissension to come in between
us, we may be better able from the very unity of our hearts to obtain
what we seek from the Lord.

Furthermore, I commend to your Holiness John, presbyter
of Chalcedon, and Athanasius of Isauria, that no one may set you
against them by underhand misrepresentations; for I have thoroughly
examined their faith, and have found them sound in their confessions,
which have also been given in writing.

Now may the Holy Trinity protect you with His hand, and
render you always vigilant and careful in the custody of souls, to the
end that in the eternal retribution you may be counted worthy to be
crowned, not only for your own work, but also for the amelioration of
your subjects.

---

Epistle
VI.

To Mauricius Augustus.

Gregory to Mauricius Augustus.

Almighty God, who has
made your Piety to be the guardian of ecclesiastical peace, preserves
you by the same faith which, through unity among priests, you preserve;
and when you submit your heart humbly to the yoke of heavenly
loving-kindness, it is brought to pass by heavenly grace that you tread
your enemies under the foot of valour.  For it cannot be of small
advantage that, when John of holy memory had departed this life, your
Piety long hesitated, and somewhat deferred the time, while seeking
counsel in the fear of Almighty God, in order,
to wit, that the cause of God might be
ordered, as it should be, with great fear.  Whence also I think that my
brother and fellow-priest Cyriacus is proved to be exceedingly fit for
pastoral rule, in that the long deliberation of your Piety has raised
him to this degree.  And we all know how diligent and how
practised he has long been in the administration of ecclesiastical
affairs.  Whence also I doubt not that it has been brought about
by Divine ordering that one who had administered

the least things well should
fitly undertake the greater, and should pass from the charge of affairs
to the government of souls.  Wherefore in all our prayers we
beseech Almighty God to repay this good work
to the Serenity of our lords and to their pious offspring both in the
present world and also with a perpetual recompense, and to grant to my
aforesaid brother and fellow-priest, who has been put over the
Lord’s flock, to shew himself fully
solicitous in the care of souls; that he may be able irreprovably both
to correct what is wrong in his subjects and to foster what is right
unto further increase; to the end that the judgment of your Piety
concerning him may be approved, not only before men, but also before
the eyes of the Supernal Majesty.

The venerable men, George the presbyter and Theodore the
deacon, in consideration of the command of my lords and the imminence
of the winter season, I have not allowed to be delayed in this
city.

---

    What is said
here shews that the appointment of the Patriarchs of Constantinople
rested in fact entirely with the Emperor.

Epistle VII.

To Peter, Domitian, and Elpidius.

Gregory to Peter, Domitian, and Elpidius,
Bishops.

I rejoice exceedingly that you welcomed with great
joy the ordination of the most holy Cyriacus, my brother and
fellow-priest.  And since we have learnt from the preaching of
Paul the apostle that *If one member rejoice, all the members rejoice
with it* (1 Cor.
xii. 26), you must
needs consider with how great exultation I rejoice with you in this
thing, wherein not one member, but many members of Christ have
rejoiced.  Nevertheless, so far as I have been able to consider
your Fraternity’s letters on a cursory perusal, great joy has
carried you away into immoderate praise of this my brother.  For
you say that he has appeared in the Church like the sun, so that you
all cried out, *This is the day which the Lord hath made; let us rejoice and be glad in it*
(Ps. cxvii. 24).  Yet surely this is a promise of
the life to come, seeing that it is said, *The righteous shall shine
forth as the sun* (Matth. xiii. 43; Wisd. iii. 7).  For, in whatsoever virtue
any one may excel, how can he shine forth as the sun while still in the
present life, wherein *The corruptible body presseth down the soul,
and the earthly tabernacle weigheth down the mind that museth upon many
things* (Wisd. ix.
15); wherein *We see
another law in our members warring against the law of our mind, and
bringing us into captivity by the law of sin which is in our
members* (Rom. vii.
23); wherein *Even in
ourselves we have the answer of death, that we should not trust in
ourselves* (2 Cor.
i. 9); wherein also the
Prophet cries aloud, *Fear and trembling are come upon me, and
darkness hath covered me* (Ps. liv. 6)?  For it is written also, A wise man
abideth as the sun; a fool changeth as the moon (Ecclus. xxvii. 12); where the comparison of the sun
is not applied to the splendour of his brightness, but to perseverance
in well-doing.  But the good beginning of his ordination could not
as yet be praised by you with regard to perseverance.  And as to
your saying that you cried out, *This is the day which the
Lord hath made*, you ought to have
considered of whom this is said.  For what comes before is this;
*The stone which the builders refused, the same is made the
head-stone of the corner.  This is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes*
(Ps. cxvii. 22).  And with regard to this same stone
it is forthwith added, *This is the day which the Lord hath made*.  For He who for strength of
building is said to be a stone, for the grace of illumination is called
the Day, being also made, because He became incarnate.  In Him we
are enjoined to rejoice and be glad, because He has overcome in us the
darkness of our error by the light of His excellence.  In praise
of a creature, then, that expression ought not to have been used which
is suitable to the Creator alone.

But why should I find fault with these things, knowing
as I do how joy carries away the mind?  For your charity
engendered in you great gladness, which gladness of heart the tongue
applauding followed.  This being so, the praise which charity
found to hand cannot now be called a fault.  But to me concerning
my most holy brother there should have been briefly said what I might
accept with satisfaction, seeing that I knew him to be one who has long
given to me especially this proof of his greatness; that, having been
occupied in so many affairs of ecclesiastical administration, he has
kept a tranquil heart in the midst of turbulent throngs, and always
restrained himself with a gentle bearing.  And this indeed is no
small commendation of a great and unshaken mind, not to have been
perturbed among the perturbations of business.

Furthermore,
your Fraternity should be instant in continual prayers, that Almighty
God may guard in our aforesaid brother and
fellow-priest what has been well begun, and ever lead him on to what is
better still.  This should ever be the prayer of you, most holy
ones, and of the people subject to him.  For the deserts of rulers
and peoples are so connected with each other that often the lives of
subjects are made worse from the fault of those who are over them, and
often the lives of pastors fall off from the ill desert of
peoples.  For that the evil doings of one who is over others does
very great harm to those who are under him the Pharisees are evidence,
of whom it is written, *Ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against
men.  For ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that
are entering to go in* (Matth. xxiii. 13).  And that the fault of peoples
does much harm to the life of pastors we perceive in what David did
(2 Kings ii. 24).  For he, praised by the
testimony of God, he, conscious of heavenly
mysteries, being inflated by the tumour of hidden elation, sinned in
numbering the people; and yet the punishment fell upon the people for
David’s sin.  Why was this?  Because in truth according
to the desert of subject peoples are the hearts of rulers
disposed.  Now the righteous Judge rebuked the fault of the sinner
by visitation on those on account of whom he sinned.  But, because
he himself, waxing proud of his own will, was not free from fault, he
himself also received punishment of his fault.  For the fierce
wrath, which smote the people bodily, prostrated also the ruler of the
people with inmost sorrow of heart.  Consider therefore these
things mutually; and, even as he who is put over you and over the
people should intercede for all, so should all of you pray for his
conversation and manners, that before Almighty God both you may profit by imitation of him, and he may be
aided by your deserts.  Further, let us all with one accord pray
continually with great weeping to the utmost of our powers for our most
serene lords and their pious offspring, that protecting heavenly grace
may guard their lives, and subdue the necks of the nations to the
Christian empire.

---

    Who these
bishops were, who had assisted at the ordination of Cyriacus and sent a
report of it to Gregory, does not appear.  In the objection taken
by the latter to the language of laudation with which the new patriarch
had been hailed at Constantinople we may perhaps detect something of
his habitual jealousy of the assumptions of the Constantinopolitan
See.  Of Cyriacus himself he appears to have had a high opinion
and to have welcomed his accession, hoping at first that he would
renounce the offensive title of œcumenical bishop which had been
assumed by John Jejunatur.  In this, however, he was disappointed,
and afterwards inveighed against the new patriarch for proud
presumption no less than against the old one.

    cxviii. 24.

    lv. 5.

    cxviii. 22.

Epistle XI.

To Rufinus, Bishop of Ephesus.

Gregory to Rufinus, &c.

The charity of your acts of friendship in the past
has moved us to visit your Fraternity with the present letter. 
For we have been refreshed with great joy by learning from reports
given us of your health that all is well with you.  But, while
this is so, we implore Almighty God, that as
in the present life, which is as it were a shadow of the future one, He
has granted you to rejoice in the transitory welfare of your body, so
in that heavenly country wherein is true life He may cause us to give
thanks and rejoice with a common exultation for the perfected salvation
of your soul.  Now the bearer of this, desiring to be commended to
you by a letter from us, having been asked by us whether he had learnt
letters as becomes a clerk, replied that he was ignorant of them. 
What further commendation, then, with regard to him I should give to
your Fraternity I know not; except that you should be solicitous about
his soul, and watch over him with pastoral zeal, so that, as he cannot
read, your tongue may be a book to him, and that in the goodness of
your preaching and work he may see what to follow.  For the living
voice usually draws the heart more closely than perfunctory
reading.  But, while, as his master, you supply him inwardly with
this spiritual teaching, let not outward care for him also be wanting,
that by its aid he come to long for spiritual things, and lest, if such
aid is slighted, you should no longer have one to preach
to.

---

Epistle
XII.

To Respecta, Abbess.

Gregory to Respecta, Abbess of Massilia
(*Marseilles*) in Gaul.

The demand of a pious wish ought to be accomplished by a
consequent result, that so the benefit demanded may be validly
attained, and sincerity of devotion may laudably shine forth. 
Accordingly to the monastery consecrated to the honour of Saint Cassian
wherein you are selected to preside—in accordance with the
petition of our children Dynamius and Aureliana, who are shewn, in
their religious devotion, to have united it to the house in their
possession by connecting the buildings—we have seen fit to allow
these privileges:—We appoint that on the death of the abbess of
the aforesaid monastery, not a stranger, but one whom the congregation
may choose for itself from among its own members, shall be ordained;
whom (provided however that she be judged worthy of this ministry) the
bishops of the same place shall ordain.  Further, with regard to
the property and management of the same monastery, we decree that
neither bishop nor any ecclesiastic shall have any power; but appoint
that these things shall in all respects pertain to the charge of thy
Solicitude, or of her who may be abbess in the same place after
thee.  If on the day of the Saint’s anniversary, or of the
dedication, 

of the aforesaid
monastery the bishop should resort thither for celebrating the sacred
solemnities of mass, still his office must be so executed that his
chair be not placed there, except on the aforesaid days while he is
celebrating there the solemnities of mass.  And when he departs,
let his chair be at the same time removed from the same oratory. 
But on all other days let the offices of mass be performed by the
presbyter whom the same bishop may appoint

Furthermore, with regard to the life and deeds of
the handmaidens of God, or of the abbess who
may be constituted in the above-written monastery, we enjoin on the
bishop, in the fear of God, to devote careful
attention to them; so that, if any of those who dwell there, her fault
demanding it, ought to be subjected to punishment, he may himself visit
the offence according to the vigour of the sacred canons.  These
things, then, being by us ordained and granted, do thou, in the
ordering of thy congregation, study to shew thyself so earnestly
attentive in all respects that the malice of the malignant foe may find
nothing there that can be contaminated.  All these things,
therefore, embraced in this paper of injunctions, we ordain to be
observed, under Christ’s protection, in all respects and by all
persons for ever in thy monastery, to the end that the benefits of the
privileges allowed may always continue firm and inviolate.  The
month of November, Indict. 15.

---

Epistle
XIII.

To Fortunatus, Bishop.

Gregory to Fortunatus, Bishop of Fanum.

As it is reprehensible and deserving of punishment
for any one to sell consecrated vessels except in cases sanctioned by
law and the sacred canons, so it is not a matter for reproach or
penalty if they should be disposed of with a compassionate purpose for
the redemption of captives.  Since, then, we find from the
information given us by your Fraternity that you have borrowed money
for the redemption of captives, and have not the means of repaying it,
and on this account desire, with our authority, to dispose of some
consecrated vessels,—in this case, seeing that the decrees of
both the laws and the canons approve, we have thought fit to lend our
approval, and grant you leave to dispose of the consecrated
vessels.  But, lest their sale should possibly lead to any
ill-feeling against yourself, they ought to be disposed of, up to the
amount of the debt, in the presence of John our *defensor*, and
their price should be paid to the creditors, to the end that, the
business being completed with observance of this kind, neither may the
creditors feel loss from having lent the money, nor your Fraternity
sustain ill-will now or at any future time.

---

    Fanum Fortunæ
in Picenum (*Fano*).

Epistle XV.

To George, Presbyter.

Gregory to George, Presbyter, and to Theodore, deacon,
of the Church of Constantinople.

Mindful of your goodness and charity, I greatly blame
myself, that I gave you leave to return so soon:  but, since I saw
you pressing me importunately once and again for leave to go, I
considered that it might be a serious matter for your Love to tarry
with us longer.  But, after I had learnt that you had lingered so
long on your journey owing to the winter season, I confess that I was
sorry that you had been sent away so soon.  For, if your Love was
unable to accomplish your intended journey, it had been better that you
had lingered with me than away from me.

Moreover, after your departure I learnt from
information given me by my most beloved sons the deacons that your Love
had said that our Almighty Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, when He descended into hell, saved all who there
acknowledged Him as God, and delivered them
from the pains due to them.  With regard to this subject I desire
that your Charity should think very differently.  For, when He
descended into hell, He delivered through His grace those only who both
believed that He should come and observed His precepts in their
lives.  For it is evident that after the incarnation of the
Lord no one can be saved, even of those who
hold His faith, who have not the life of faith; since it is written,
*They acknowledge that they know God, but in
deeds they deny Him* (Tit. i. 16).  And John says, *He that
saith that he knows Him, and keepeth not His commandments, is a
liar* (1 John ii.
4).  James also,
the brother of the Lord, writes saying,
*Faith without works is dead* (Jam. ii. 20).  If, then, believers now
are not saved without good works, while the unbelieving and reprobate
without good action were saved by our Lord
descending into hell, then the lot of those who never saw the
incarnation of the Lord was better than that
of these who have been born after the mystery of His incarnation. 
But what fatuity it argues to say or think this the Lord Himself testifies to His disciples, when He says,
*Many kings and prophets have desired to see the things which ye see,
and have not seen them* (Matth. xiii. 17; Luke x. 24).  But, that I may not 

detain your Love with argument of my own,
learn what Philaster, in the book which he wrote about heresies, says
about this heresy.  His words are these; “They are heretics
who say that the Lord descended into hell, and
announced himself after death to all who were already there, so that in
acknowledging Him there they might be saved; seeing that this is
contrary to the prophet David where he says, *But in hell who shall
acknowledge thee* (Ps. vi. 6)?  And to the Apostle; *As
many as have sinned without law shall perish without law*
(Rom. ii.
12).”  And with
his words the blessed Augustine also agrees in the book which he wrote
about heresies.

Considering, therefore, all these things, hold ye
nothing but what the true faith teaches through the Catholic Church:
namely, that the Lord in descending into hell
rescued from infernal durance those only whom while living in the flesh
He preserved through His grace in faith and good conduct.  For in
that which He says in the Gospel, *When I shall be lifted up from the
earth, I will draw all to myself* (John xii. 32), He means all that are
elect.  For one could not be drawn to God
after death who had separated himself from God
by evil living.  May Almighty God keep
you under His protection, that, wherever ye are, ye may feel in soul
and body the aid of His grace.

---

Epistle XVII.

To Sabinianus, Bishop.

Gregory to Sabinianus, Bishop of Jadera.

If thou hadst been at pains to weigh with careful
consideration the rule of ecclesiastical administration and the order
of ancient custom, neither would any fault of unlawful presumption have
crept in upon thee, nor would others have incurred danger by occasion
of thy sin.  Now there is no doubt that thou wast aware how that,
certain things having come to our ears about Maximus which were no
slight bar to his advancement to the priesthood, we had not given our
assent to it, and that it was our will that he should not attain to
what he strove after till there had been adequate satisfaction
concerning the things that were said.  But, when thou oughtest by
all means to have observed this, it came rather to pass that he,
snatching at the episcopate with the greediness of a blind mind,
inclined thee unwarily to favour him in spite of our prohibition. 
But, lest even then the things that had been reported to us should
remain unexamined, he was summoned to come hither by letters from
us.  And, when he was so perversely inclined as to defer doing so,
we took care to admonish him in repeated letters, under pain of
interdiction from communion, to make haste to come to us for his
purification, putting aside all excuses:  but he chose rather to
submit to excommunication than to evince obedience.  Whence the
result is (awful to be said), that the pravity of his perverse
disposition involves others in his own perdition.  Now however,
inasmuch as we have learnt that thou dissentest from his wickedness, we
exhort thee by the present writing (that so it may profit thy soul to
have severed thyself, even though late, from him) that thou henceforth
neither communicate with him nor make mention of his name in the sacred
solemnities of mass; and also that thou defer not coming to us without
delay, yea and bring others with thee too, such as thou canst, whether
bishops or other religious persons, so that (the cause being thoroughly
examined), both your absolution, should the case require it, may
fittingly and decently ensue, and that those who have fallen into the
sin of the like temerity may be recalled to the way of salvation, with
the help of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, by an
arrangement well-pleasing to Christ.  Moreover, let any bishop or
religious person that may come to us know that he will sustain no
prejudice or injustice, but that all will be arranged so as to please
our Redeemer after full ascertainment of the truth; to the end that
even from our way of ordering the matter, with the Lord’s approval, it may appear to all that we are
not moved by private grudge against any man, but by zeal for
God and for the adjustment of ecclesiastical
order.

---

    See VI. 27, note
6.

Epistle XIX.

To Marinianus, Archbishop.

Gregory to Marinianus, Archbishop of
Ravenna.

Your Fraternity has been long aware after what
manner the Church of Ariminum has been hitherto deprived of pastoral
government by reason of the known bodily affliction of the priest who
was ordained by us.  Now we,
moved by the prayers of the inhabitants of that place, having
frequently exhorted him to return with the help of the Lord to his Church, if he should feel himself relieved
from this affliction of the head whereby he was kept away, he has been
expected now for four years since the leave of absence given him. 
And, when at the instance of clergy and citizens who have come from
thence and urged us with

entreaties, we urgently exhorted him to
return with them, the Lord helping him, if
able to do so, he begged of us by a supplication in writing, that, inasmuch as by reason of this
affliction wherewith he is held he can in no wise rise to the
government of the same Church, or to the office undertaken by him, we
should ordain a bishop to this same Church.  Hence, seeing that
the charge laid upon us of caring for all the Churches constrains us to
see that pastoral guardianship be no longer wanting to the flock of the
faithful, and being compelled by their entreaties, and by his
renunciation on the ground of his own inability, we have resolved that
a bishop should be ordained to this same Church of Ariminum:  and,
having issued our precept according to custom, we have not failed to
admonish the clergy and people of the same Church, to the end that they
may concur with concordant provision to choose for themselves a
prelate.  We
therefore exhort your Fraternity that him whom all with one consent
shall choose (as they themselves also have requested leave to do) you
cause to be summoned before you; and test him by cautious enquiry on
all sides.  And if, by favour of the Lord, none of the things that are punished with death in
the text of the Heptateuch are found in him, and if, on the report of
trustworthy persons, his life should approve itself to you, send him to
us with the certification of his election, adding your own letter of
testification, to the end that a prelate of this same Church may, under
the ordering of the Lord, be by us
consecrated.

---

    Concerning the
election of Marinianus, see V. 48.

    Viz.
Castorius.  See II. 41.

    Cf. XI. 47 as to
the supersession of a bishop incapacitated by illness, except at his
own written request, being uncanonical.

    See Ep. XX., which
follows.

Epistle
XX.

*To the Clergy and People Ariminum*.

Gregory to the Clergy, &c.

Our pastoral charge constrains us to succour with
anxious consideration any Churches that are deprived of the government
of a priest.  Accordingly, inasmuch as your Church has long been
deprived of pastoral rule from the malady, as you know, of its own
priest, we, moved by your entreaties, have not failed to admonish the
said bishop, that, if he should feel himself recovered from that
malady, he should resume the ministry of the priesthood undertaken by
him.  And he, having been again and again warned by us, has now
under the pressure of the same malady intimated by a supplication
addressed to us in writing that by reason of this malady he can by no
means rise to the government of the said Church or to the office
undertaken by him.  We therefore, compelled by the hopeless
condition of this same person, have held it necessary to take thought
for the setting in order of your Church.  We exhort, then, that
all of you, with one consent, without noise or disturbance, choose with
the help of the Lord such a priest to preside
over you as may not be disapproved by the venerable canons, and also be
found worthy of so great a ministry.  And let him, when required,
come to us to be ordained, with the solemnity of a decree attested by
the subscriptions of all and followed up by the written approval of the
visitor, to the end that
your Church, by the Lord’s ordering, may
have its own priest.

We desire also that him whom your unanimity may
have chosen you take without delay to our brother and fellow-bishop
Marinianus at Ravenna, that, having been
thoroughly examined and tested by him, he may be supported by his
testimony also when he comes to us.

---

    See preceding
Epistle.

    Viz. a bishop
Sebastian, who had been commissioned, as was usual in such cases, to
visit the church of Ariminum during the incapacity of its proper
bishop.  The Epistle which follows this (Ep. XXI., which, as not
throwing further light on the proceedings, has not been translated) is
addressed to him, directing him to see to the due election, &c., of
a successor to Castorius.

    As Metropolitan. 
See preceding Epistle.

Epistle XXIII.

*To Fortunatus and Anthemius*.

Gregory to Fortunatus, bishop, and Anthemius,
guardian (*defensori*).

Catellus, the bearer of these presents, has
informed us that his sister, who had been betrothed to one Stephen,
has, through divine mercy moving her, been converted in a monastery at Naples, and that the
same Stephen improperly detains a house and some other things belonging
to her.  And, inasmuch as legal decrees (*Caus.* 17, q. 2, c.
28) have appointed that a betrothed woman, should she wish to be
converted, shall suffer no loss whatever, let thy Fraternity, together
with Anthemius the subdeacon, endeavour by diligent enquiry to
investigate the truth.  And if, as we have been informed, you find
that the Stephen above-named is keeping a house or anything else
unjustly, let him be urgently warned by your exhortation to restore
without any delay or altercation what he unduly detains, and not to
defer under any kind of excuse the restitution of what is not his
own.  And if perchance you find him neglect your exhortation,
notify this to us, giving also an accurate account of the

facts of the case, to the end that,
when the merits of the case are known, he may be forced by other means,
in accordance with equity, to make the restitution which he scorns to
make of his own accord out of regard to honesty.  Commending the
bearer of these presents to thy Fraternity, we exhort thee to allow him
no longer to suffer from delay on this account.

---

    Fortunatis was bishop
of Naples, and Anthemius a subdeacon, and *Defensor* of
Campania.

    *Conversam
fuisse*; the usual phrase for taking to monastic life.

Epistle
XXV.

To Gregoria.

Gregory to Gregoria, Lady of the Bed-chamber
(*cubiculariæ*) to Augusta.

I have received the longed for letters of your
Sweetness, in which you have been at pains all through to accuse
yourself of a multitude of sins:  but I know that you fervently
love the Almighty Lord, and I trust in His
mercy that the sentence which was pronounced with regard to a certain
holy woman proceeds from the mouth of the Truth with regard to
you:  *Her sins, which are many, are forgiven her, for she loved
much* (Luke vii.
47).  And how they
were forgiven is shewn also by what follows afterwards; that she sat at
the Lord’s feet, and heard the word from
His mouth (Luke x.
39).  For, being rapt in the
contemplative, she had transcended the active life, which Martha her
sister still pursued (Ib. 40).  She also sought earnestly
her buried Lord, and, stooping over the
sepulchre, found not His body.  But, even when the disciples went
away, she remained standing before the door of the sepulchre, and whom
she sought as dead, Him she was counted worthy to see alive, and
announced to the disciples that He had risen again.  And this was
by the wonderful dispensation of the loving-kindness of God, that life should be announced by a woman’s
mouth, because by a woman’s mouth had been the first taste of
death in Paradise.  And at another time also, with another Mary,
she saw the Lord after His resurrection, and
held His feet.  Bring before your eyes, I pray you, what hands
held whose feet.  That woman who had been a sinner in the city,
those hands which had been polluted with iniquity, touched the feet of
Him who sits at the right hand of the Father above all the
angels.  Let us estimate, if we can, what those bowels of heavenly
loving-kindness are, that a woman who had been plunged through sin into
the whirlpool’s depth should be thus lifted high on the wing of
love through grace.  It is fulfilled, sweet daughter, it is
fulfilled, what was promised to us by the prophetic voice concerning
this time of the holy Church:  *And in that day the house of
David shall be an open fountain for ablution of the sinner and of her
that is unclean* (Zach. xiii. 1).  For the house of David is an
open fountain for ablution to us sinners, because we are washed from
the filth of our iniquities by mercy now disclosed through the son of
David our Saviour.

But as to what thy Sweetness has added in thy letters,
namely that thou wilt continue to be urgent with me till I write that
it has been revealed to me that thy sins are forgiven, thou hast
demanded a difficult, nay even an unprofitable thing; difficult indeed,
because I am unworthy of having a revelation made to me; but
unprofitable, because thou oughtest not to become secure about thy
sins, except when in the last day of thy life thou shalt be able no
longer to bewail them.  But, until that day comes, thou oughtest,
ever suspicious and ever fearful, to be afraid of faults, and wash them
with daily tears.  Assuredly the apostle Paul had already ascended
into the third heaven, had also been caught up into Paradise, and heard
secret words which it was not lawful for a man to speak (2 Cor. xii. 2, &c.), and yet, still fearful,
he said, *I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest
that by any means, while preaching to others, I myself should become a
castaway* (1 Cor.
ix. 27).  One who
is caught up into heaven still fears; and shall one whose conversation
is still on earth desire already not to fear?  Consider, most
sweet daughter, that security is wont to be the mother of
carelessness.  Thou oughtest not, then, in this life to have
security, whereby thou mayest be rendered careless.  For it is
written, *Happy is the man that is always afraid*
(Prov. xxviii.
14).  And again it
is written, *Serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice unto him with trembling* (Ps. ii. 11).  In short, then, it must
needs be that in the time of this life trembling possess your soul, to
the end that it may hereafter rejoice without end through the joy of
security.  May Almighty God fill your
soul with the grace of His Holy Spirit, and, after the tears which you
daily shed in prayer, bring you to eternal joys.

---

    It will be observed
that Gregory identifies the woman who had been a sinner in the city
with the sister of Martha, and also with the Magdalene.

Epistle
XXVI.

*To Theoctista, Patrician*

Gregory to Theoctista, &c.

That your Excellency, though placed in so 

great a tumult of affairs, is full of the
fruitfulness of the sacred word, and incessantly pants after eternal
joys, for this I give great thanks to Almighty God, in that in you I see fulfilled what is written of the
elect fathers, *But the children of Israel walked on dry land through
the midst of the sea* (Exod. xv. 19).  But on the other hand,
*I am come into the depth of the sea, and the storm hath overwhelmed
me* (Ps. lxviii. 3).  But you, as I see, walk with dry
feet through the waves of secular affairs to the country of
promise.  Let us give thanks, then, to that Spirit who lifts up
the hearts which He fills; who amid the tumults of men makes a solitude
in the soul; and in whose presence there is no place, wherein a soul
moved by compunction can be, which is not a secret one.  For you
inhale the odour of eternal sweetness, and so ardently love the
bridegroom of your soul as to be able to say with the heavenly bride,
*Draw me after thee; we run in the odour of thine ointments*
(Cant. i. 3).  But in the letters of your
Excellency I find this deficiency; that you have been unwilling to tell
me about your most serene mistress, how studiously she reads, or how
she is moved by compunction in her reading.  For your presence
ought to be of great advantage to her, that amid the billows of affairs
under which she continually suffers and by which, whether she will or
no, she is drawn abroad, she may be recalled inwardly to the love of
the heavenly country.  And this also you ought to investigate, as
often as tears are given her for her soul, whether her compunction
arises still from fear, or whether now from love.

For there are two kinds of compunction, as you
know:  one that is afraid of eternal pains, the other that sighs
for heavenly rewards; since the soul that is athirst for God is first moved to compunction by fear, and afterwards
by love.  For in the first place it is affected to tears because,
while recollecting its evil doings, it fears to suffer for them eternal
punishments.  But, when fear has died away in the anxiety of a
long sorrow, a certain security has birth from a sense of pardon; and
the mind is enflamed with love of heavenly joys.  And one who
previously wept for fear of punishment begins afterwards to weep most
bitterly for being kept back from the kingdom.  For the soul
contemplates what are those choirs of angels, what is the very society
of blessed spirits, what the vision of the inward brightness of
God; and laments more for the lack of unending
good than it wept before when it feared eternal evil; and thus it comes
to pass that the compunction of fear, when perfected, draws the mind to
the compunction of love.  All this is well described in the sacred
and true history, understood figuratively, which says, *Axa the
daughter of Caleph sighed sitting on an ass.  And her father said
to her, What wouldest thou?  Who answered, Give me a blessing,
Thou hast given me a South and dry land; give me also a watered
land.  And her father gave her the upper springs, and the nether
springs* (Josh. xv.
18).  For indeed Axa sits on an ass,
when the soul presides over the irrational motions of the flesh. 
And sighing she seeks a watered land from her father, because the grace
of tears is to be sought with great longing from our Creator.  For
there are some who have already freely received the gift of speaking in
behalf of justice, of protecting the oppressed, of giving of their own
to the needy, of having ardour of faith, but have not yet the grace of
tears.  These, that is to say, have a South and dry land, but
still need springs of water; because, while they are occupied in good
works, wherein they are great and fervent, they have still sore need
(either from fear of punishment, or from love of the heavenly kingdom)
to lament the sins which they cannot be without while they live. 
But since, as I have said, there are two kinds of compunction, her
father gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.  For the
soul receives the upper springs, when she afflicts herself in tears for
desire of the heavenly kingdom; but she receives the nether springs,
when she shudders with weeping at the punishments of hell.  And
indeed the nether springs are given first, and the upper springs
afterwards.  But, because the compunction of love is far above the
other indignity, there was need for the upper springs to be mentioned
first, and the nether springs afterwards.  You then, who through
the operation of the Almighty Lord know by
experience both kinds of compunction, ought anxiously to try to
discover day by day how much you are profiting your most serene
mistress by your words.

Further, I beg you to take especial care to instruct in
good morals the little lords whom you are bringing up, and to admonish
the glorious eunuchs who are appointed to attend them that they should
speak to them such things as may move their minds to mutual

charity between themselves and to
gentleness towards subjects; lest, if they should conceive now any
grudge against each other, it should break out openly hereafter. 
For in truth the words of those who bring up children will be either
milk, if they are good, or poison if they are evil.  Let them
therefore so speak now to the little ones that the latter may shew
hereafter what good words they had sucked from the mouths of those who
nursed them.

Furthermore, my beloved son, Sabinianus the
deacon, has brought thirty pounds of gold, sent by your Excellency to
be given for the redemption of captives and for distribution to the
poor; with regard to which I rejoice, but tremble for myself, seeing
that I shall have to render an account before the tremendous Judge, not
only of the substance of Saint Peter, Prince of the apostles, but also
of your possessions.  But to you may Almighty God return heavenly things for earthly, and eternal for
temporal.  I have now to inform you that from the city of Crotona,
which, lying on the Adriatic Sea in the land of Italy, was taken last
year by the Lombards, many noble men and many noble women were led away
captive, and children were parted from their parents, parents from
their children, husbands from their wives, and wives from their
husbands; of whom some have already been redeemed.  But, because
of the heavy prices put upon them, many have remained so far in the
hands of those most abominable Lombards.  But I sent at once for
their redemption a moiety of the money sent by you.  Out of the
other moiety I have arranged for the purchase of bed-clothes for the
handmaidens of God whom you in Greek language
call *monastriæ;* seeing that they suffer from grievous
bareness in their beds during the very severe cold of this winter;
there being many of them in this city.  For, according to the
official list of them, they are found to be three thousand in
number.  They do indeed receive fourscore pounds a year from the
possessions of Saint Peter, Prince of the apostles.  But what is
this for so great a multitude, especially in this city, where
everything is so dear?  Their life, moreover, is such, and strict
to such a degree in tears and abstinence, that we believe that, but for
them, not one of us could have subsisted for so many years in this
place among the swords of the Lombards.

Furthermore, I send you, as a blessing from Saint
Peter the apostle, a key from his most sacred body; with respect to
which key the miracle has been wrought which I now relate.  A
certain Lombard, having found it on his entrance into a city in the
parts beyond the Po, and, paying no regard to it as Saint Peter’s
key, but wishing to make something of it for himself in that he saw it
to be of gold, took out a knife to cut it.  But presently seized
by a spirit, he plunged the knife wherewith he had thought to cut it
into his own throat, and in the same hour fell down dead.  And
when Autharith, king of the Lombards, and many
others belonging to him came to the place, and he who had stabbed
himself was lying apart in one place dead, and this key on the ground
in another, exceeding fear came upon all, so that no one ventured to
lift this same key from the ground.  Then a certain Lombard who
was a Catholic, and known to be given to prayer and almsgiving, Minulf
by name, was called, and himself lifted it from the ground.  But
Autharith, in consideration of this miracle, made another golden key,
and sent it along with this to my predecessor of holy memory, declaring
what kind of miracle had through it occurred.  I have taken
thought, then, to send your Excellence this key, through which Almighty
God cut off a proud and faithless man, that
through it you who fear and love Him may be enabled to have both
present and eternal welfare.

---

    This patrician lady
was sister of the Emperor Mauricius (see I. 5), and appears from what
is said in this letter to have been governess of the imperial children,
and in close attendance on the Empress Constantina.  The letter is
in many respects interesting and characteristic.  In it may be
noted Gregory’s way of retaining influence over devout ladies in
high circles, and through them hoping to influence others; his
favourite method of allegorizing the Old Testament Scriptures; his
tendency to regard remarkable incidents as miraculous; and his allusion
to the very large number of females at that time leading a monastic
life in Rome.  Cf. XI. 45, addressed to the same lady.

    Ps. lxix. 2.

    The whole passage
which follows about two kinds of compunction, with the allegorical
interpretation of the story of Achsah, is found, word for word, in the
Dialogues Lib. III. cap. 34.

    In Joshua xv. 18, instead of “and she lighted off
her ass,” as in the English Version, the Vulgate has
“suspiravitque ut sedebat in asino.”

    See I. 17, note
4.

Epistle
XXVII.

To Anastasius, Bishop.

Gregory to Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch.

I have received through the hands of our common
son the deacon Sabinianus the longed for letter of your most sweet
Holiness, in which the words have flowed not from your tongue but from
your soul.  And it is not surprising that one speaks well who
lives perfectly.  And, since you have learnt, through the Spirit
teaching you in the school of the heart, the precepts of life—to
despise all earthly things and to speed to the heavenly
country,—in proportion as you have advanced in good you think
what is good of others.  But, when I heard many things said in the
letters of your Blessedness in praise of me, I understood your
intention; how that you wished to describe not what I am, but what I
ought to be.  But as to your saying that I ought to remember my
manner of life, and on no account give place to the malignant spirit
who seeks to sift souls, I indeed recollect myself to have been always
of bad manner of life, and hasten to overcome and put an end to this my
manner of life, if I can.  If however, as you believe, I have had
anything good in me, I trust in the help of Almighty God that I have not forgotten it.  But your Holiness,
as I see, by the words of sweetness at the beginning and

the words that follow, has
wished your letter to be like a bee, which carries both honey and a
sting, satiating me with the honey and piercing me with the
sting.  But meanwhile I return to meditation on the words of
Solomon, *That better are the wounds of one that loves than the
kisses of a flattering foe* (Prov. xxvii. 6).  Thus, as to your saying that we
ought not to give occasion of offence for no cause at all, this is what
your son, our most pious lord (for whose life we ought continually to
pray) has already written repeatedly; and what he says out of power I
know that you say out of love.  Nor do I wonder that you have made
use of imperial language in your letters, since there is a very close
relationship between love and power.  For both presume in a
princely way; both ever speak with authority.

And indeed on the receipt of the synodical epistle
of our brother and fellow-bishop Cyriacus it was not worth my while to
make a difficulty on account of the profane title at the risk of
disturbing the unity of holy Church:  but nevertheless I took care
to admonish him with respect to this same superstitious and proud
title, saying that he could not have peace with us unless he corrected
the elation of the aforesaid expression, which the first apostate
invented.  You, however, ought not to say that this is a matter of
no consequence, since, if we bear it with equanimity, we are corrupting
the faith of the Universal Church; for you know how many not only
heretics but heresiarchs have issued from the Constantinopolitan
Church.  And, not to speak of the injury done to your dignity, if
one bishop is called Universal, the Universal Church comes to ruin, if
the one who is universal falls.  But far, far be this levity from
my ears.  Yet I trust in Almighty God
that what He has promised He will soon fulfil; *Whosoever exalteth
himself shall be humbled* (Luke xiv. 11).

So much, in the midst of many occupations.  I have
briefly replied to what you have said in your letters:  for what I
ought not just now to express in writing remains imprinted on my
mind.  I beg your Blessedness always to recall me to your memory
in your holy prayers, that so your intercessions may rescue me from
temporal and eternal ills.  Pray moreover zealously and fervently
for the most serene lord the Emperor; for his life is very necessary
for the world.  I refrain from saying more, for I doubt not that
you know.

---

Epistle
XXVIII.

To Theodore, Physician.

Gregory to Theodore, Physician at Constantinople.

My most beloved son the deacon Sabinianus, on his return to me, brought me no letter
from your Glory; but he conveyed hither what had been sent for the poor
and captives; whence I understood the reason.  It was that you
would not speak by letters to a man, having by a good deed made your
address to Almighty God.  For this same
deed of yours has a voice of its own, which calls to the secret ears of
God, as it is written, *Hide thy alms in the
bosom of the poor, and it shall entreat for thee*
(Ecclus. xxix. 15).  And indeed to me, I
confess, it is sad to expend what is not my own, and to add to the
accounts which I keep of the substance of the Church those also of the
property of my most sweet son the lord Theodore.  And yet I
rejoice with your benignity that you carefully attend to and observe
what the Truth says; *Give alms, and behold, all things are clean
unto you* (Luke xi.
41); and this which is
written, *Even as water quencheth fire, so alms quench sin*
(Ecclus. iii. 33).  Paul the apostle also
says, *Let your abundance supply their want, that their abundance
also may be a supply to your want* (2 Cor. viii. 14).  Tobias admonishes his son,
saying, *If thou hast much, give abundantly; but if thou hast little,
of that little impart willingly* (Tob. iv. 9).  You therefore observe all
these precepts:  but we beg you to pray for us, lest we should
dispense the fruits of your labours indiscreetly, and not as need
requires; lest from that whereby you diminish sins we should heap up
sins.  Now may Almighty God keep you
under His protection, and so grant you human favour in an earthly court
as to bring you after a long life to the eternal joys of a heavenly
court.

We send you as the benediction of Saint Peter, Prince of
the apostles, whom you greatly love, a key from his most sacred body,
in which is enclosed iron from his chains, that what bound his neck for
martyrdom, may loose yours from all sins.

---

    Gregory’s
*apocrisiarius* at Constantinople, and eventually his successor in
the See of Rome.  See III. 53.

Epistle XXX.

*To Narses, the Religious (Narsæ
Relegioso)*.

Gregory to Narses, &c.

When I was sending Romanus the guardian
(*defensorem*) to the royal city, he sought long your letters, but
they could not be found:  

but afterwards they were found among many
letters from other persons, your Sweetness, therein telling me of your
afflictions and tribulations of spirit, and making known the
oppositions to you of bad men.  But, I pray you, in all this
recall to your mind what I believe too that you never forget, *That
all who will live godly in Christ suffer persecution.* 
(2 Tim. iii.
12).  And with
regard to this I confidently say that you would live less godly if you
suffered persecution less.  For let us hear what else the same
teacher of the Gentiles says to his disciples; *Yourselves know,
brethren, our entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain; for we had
before suffered and been shamefully entreated* (1 Thess. ii. 1).  Lo, most sweet son, the
holy preacher declared that his entrance would have been of no effect,
if he had not been shamefully entreated; and thy Charity wishes to say
good things, but refuses to endure evil things.  Wherefore thou
must needs gird thyself up more tightly in the midst of adverse
circumstances, that adversity itself may the more increase thy desire
for the love of God and thy earnestness in
good works.  So the seeds of harvests germinate the more
fruitfully for being covered over with frost; so fire is kept down by a
blast, that it may grow greater.  I know indeed that from the
perverse speeches of so many evil tongues thou endurest a violent
storm, and bearest in thy soul billows of contradictions.  But
remember what the Lord says by the Psalmist,
*I heard thee in the secret place of storm; I proved thee at the
waters of contradiction* (Psal. lxxx. 8).  For, if in the midst of them that
contradict thou doest the things that are of God, then thou art proved a true worker.

Further, your most sweet Charity has written to me
that I should write something in the way of admonition to the
monasteries which, through your prayers and influence, have been
instituted by our son the lord Paul.  But, if they are vessels of
God, I know that they have through the grace
of compunction a fountain of wisdom within, and ought not to take in
the little drops of my dryness.  Further, your perfect wisdom
recollects that in Paradise there was no rain, but a fountain ascended
from the midst of Paradise to water the face of the ground.  Those
souls, then, that through the grace of compunction have a fountain in
themselves have no need of rain from another’s tongue.

Further, you inform me in your letter of the
passing away of the lady Esychia; and I
rejoiced with great exultation that that good soul, which laboured in a
foreign country, has arrived happily at its own.  Further, greet
in my behalf my glorious daughters, the lady Dominica and the lady
Eudochia.  But, inasmuch as I hear that it is now a long time
since the aforesaid lady Dominica was made a prioress, let your Charity
watch over her in this regard; that, as she is no longer compelled to
serve in the toil of an earthy court, she may fly perfectly from all
noises of this world, devote herself entirely to God, and leave no part of herself outside herself; but
that she also gather together as many souls as she can to the service
of her Creator, that their minds through her word may receive the grace
of compunction, and that she herself may so much the more speedily be
absolved from all her sins as, through her life and her tongue, the
souls of others also shall have broken loose from the bands of
sins.  Moreover, since no one among men in this world is without
sin (and what else is sinning but flying from God?), I say confidently that this my daughter also has
some sins.  Wherefore, that she may perfectly satisfy her
mistress, that is eternal Wisdom, let her, who fled alone, return with
many.  For the guilt of turning away will be imputed to no one who
in returning brings back gain.

Further, I beg you to greet in my behalf the lord
Alexander and the lord Theodorus.  But with respect to your saying
in your letter that I ought to write to my most excellent daughter the
lady Gurdia, and her most holy daughter the lady Theoctista, and their magnificent husbands, the
lord Marinus and the lord Christidorus, and to give them some
admonition about their souls, your most sweet Greatness well knows that
there are none at present in the city of Constantinople who can
translate well into Greek what has been dictated in Latin.  For
keeping to the words, but attending little to the sense, they both fail
to make the words understood and also mangle the sense.  On this
account I have written shortly to my aforesaid daughter the lady
Gurdia; but have not addressed the others.  Further, I have sent
you two *camisiæ* and four *oraria*, which I beg may be
humbly

offered, with
the blessing of St. Peter, to the aforesaid men.  Besides, a
certain person on his death has left me by will a little boy; taking
thought for whose soul, I have sent him to your Sweetness, that he may
live in this world in the service of one through whom he may be able to
attain to the liberty of heaven.  Further, I beg your most sweet
Charity to visit frequently my most beloved son, the deacon Anatolius,
whom I have sent to represent the Church in the royal city, that after
the toils which he endures in secular causes he may find rest with you
in the word of God, and wipe away the sweat of
this his earthly toil as it were with a kind of white napkin. 
Commend him to all who are known to you, though I am sure that, if he
is perfectly known, he needs no commendation.  Yet do you shew
with regard to him how much you love the holy apostle Peter, and
me.  Now may Almighty God guard your
Charity, to me most sweet, from enemies within and without, and, when
it shall please Him, bring you to heavenly kingdoms.

---

    On the designation
*Religiosus,* cf. I. 61, note 7.  The Narses here addressed
as “Religiosus” was probably the same as the “Narses
Comes” of I. 6, and VI. 14, and the “Narses
Patricius” of IV. 32 (see note to I. 6).  For it is evident
from the letters that he was of high rank at Constantinople, and
greetings are sent through him to the same persons as in the other
letters.  He had now, we may suppose, devoted himself to the
service of the Church in some capacity.

    Ps. lxxxi. 7.

    Cf. I. 6, where
greetings were sent to this lady, there also designated as
*Domna*.

    The Emperor
Maurice is said to have had a sister called Gordia, who may have been
the lady here referred to.  Her daughter Theoctista may be
concluded from the epithet “sanctissima” to have been
piously disposed; and it may have been a fear lest her piety should
suffer through the temptations of fashionable life that had led Narses,
who was himself religious, to suggest to Gregory that he should write
letters of admonition to the husbands of these ladies, as well as to
themselves.  Gregory’s reluctance to do so may have arisen
from a fear of giving offence to such distinguished people from the
purport of what he could only write in Latin being misunderstood. 
Elsewhere apparent are his caution and delicacy in dealing with great
people.

Epistle
XXXI.

To Cyriacus, Bishop.

Gregory to Cyriacus, Bishop of Constantinople.

We have received the letters of your Blessedness,
which speak to us in words not of the tongue but of the soul.  For
they open to me your mind, which, however, was not closed to me, since
of myself I retain experience of the same sweetness.  Wherefore I
return thanks continually to Almighty God,
since, if charity the mother of virtues abides in your heart towards
us, you will never lose the branches of good works, seeing that you
retain the very root of goodness.  You ought, then, to shew the
beauty of this charity to me and to all your brethren by this good work
in the first place,—your hastening to discard that word of pride
whereby grave offence is engendered in the Churches, thus fulfilling in
all ways what is written, *Endeavouring to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace* (Ephes. iv. 3):  and again, *Give none
occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully*
(1 Tim. v.
14).  For then
will true charity be displayed, if there is no schism among us through
an example of pride.  For, as for me, I call Jesus to witness in
my soul, that to no one among men from the highest to the lowest do I
wish to give occasion of offence.  I desire that all should be
great and honourable, yet so that their honour detract not from the
honour of Almighty God.  For whoso covets
to be honoured against God to me is not
honourable.  But, that you may learn what good will I have towards
your Blessedness, I have sent my son the deacon Anatolius to the feet
of our most pious lords, for satisfying their Piety and your Fraternity
that I desire to injure no man in this matter, but to keep the humility
that is pleasing to God, and the concord of
holy Church.  And because Antichrist, the enemy of God, is near at hand, I studiously desire the he may not
find anything belonging to himself, not only in the manners, but even
in the titles of priests.  Let then what has been introduced after
a new fashion be removed in like manner as it was brought in, and peace
in the Lord will remain with us
inviolate.  For what pleasantness, what charity, will there be
amongst us, if we cheer ourselves up with words, while we are galled by
facts?  Let then your Holiness so act that we may feel in our
inmost hearts the good things you speak of, to the end that, the hearts
of priests being in unanimity, when we supplicate for the life of our
most pious lords, we may be counted worthy to be heard all the more as
peace illuminates your prayers before the eyes of God, and no stain of discord darkens
them.

---

Epistle
XXXII.

*To Anastasius, Presbyter*.

Gregory to Anastasius, &c.

That a good man out of the good treasure of his heart
bringeth forth good things (Matth. xii. 35; Luke vi. 45), this thy Charity has shewn, both
in thy habitual life and lately also in thy epistle; wherein I find two
persons at issue with regard to virtues; that is to say, thyself
contending for charity, and another for fear and humility.  And,
though occupied with many things, though ignorant of the Greek
language, I have nevertheless sat as judge of your contention. 
But, in very truth, thou hast, in my judgment, thyself conquered thy
opponent by the apostolical sentence, which I proffered to you during
your contention, *That there is no fear in charity,, but perfect
charity casteth out fear; because fear hath torment.  He that
feareth is not made perfect in charity*.  I know then how much
thy Fraternity is made perfect in charity.  And, since thou lovest
Almighty God much, thou oughtest to presume on
thy neighbour much.  For it is not places or ranks that make us
neighbours to our Creator; but either our good deserts join us to Him,
or our bad deserts separate us from

Him.  Since, then, it is still
uncertain what any one is inwardly, how was it that thou wast afraid to
write, ignorant as thou art as to which of us two is the
superior?  And indeed that thou livest well I know, but I am
conscious myself of being burdened by many sins.  And though thou
art thyself a sinner, still thou art much better than I, since thou
bearest thine own sins only, but I those also of the persons committed
to me.  In this, then, I look upon thee as lofty, in this I look
upon thee as great, that in a great place and lofty before human eyes
thou hast not felt thyself advanced at all.  For therein, while
honour is paid thee by men outwardly, thy mind is sunk into depths,
because burdened by distracting cares.  But to thee Almighty
God has done as it is written; *He hath laid
down ascents in the heart, in the valley of tears*
(Ps. lxxxiii. 6).  To me, however, thou
mightest have appeared far loftier, far more sublime, hadst thou never
undertaken the leadership of the monastery which is called Neas, seeing
that in that monastery, as I hear, there is indeed an appearance of
monks kept up, but many secular things are done under the garb of
sanctity.  But even to this I shall think that heavenly grace has
brought thee, if what in that place displeases Almighty God should be corrected under thy guidance.

But, since there have been wont to be quarrels
between the father of this same monastery and the pastor of the Church
of Jerusalem, I believe that Almighty God has
willed that thy Love and my most holy brother and fellow-priest Amos
should be at the same time at Jerusalem for this end, that the quarrels
which I have spoken of should be put an end to.  Shew, then, now
how much you loved before.  For I know that both of you are
abstinent, both learned, both humble; whence the glory of our Saviour
must needs be praised, according to the language of the Psalm, in
timbrel and chorus (Ps.
cl. 4).  For in a
timbrel the sound from the skin is dry, but in a chorus there is a
concord of voices.  What therefore is denoted by a timbrel but
abstinence, and what by a chorus but unanimity?  Since then by
abstinence ye praise the Lord in timbrel, I
beg that by unanimity ye praise Him in chorus.  The Truth also in
person says, *Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with
another* (Mark ix.
50).  What is
denoted by salt but wisdom, as Paul attests, who says, *Let your
speech be alway in grace, seasoned with salt* (Col. iv. 6)?  Since, then, we know that you
have salt through the teaching of the heavenly word, it remains that
through the grace of charity you keep with all your hearts peace
between yourselves.  All this I say, dearest brother, because I
love you both exceedingly, and am much afraid lest the sacrifices of
your prayers should be stained by any dissension between you.

The blessing which you sent, first by Exhilaratus
the *Secundicerius*, and afterwards
by Sabinianus the deacon, I received with thanksgiving, since from a
holy place it became you to send holy things, and to shew by your very
gift whom you serve continually.  May Almighty God protect you with His right hand, and preserve you
scatheless from all evils.

---

    This epistle
appears to have been in reply to one from a presbyter.  Anastasius
(*al*. Athanasius), of Jerusalem announcing his promotion to the
abbacy of a monastery there.  There had been, it seems, a standing
feud between the abbots of this monastery and the bishops of Jerusalem,
the continuance of which Gregory gracefully deprecates in the course of
his letter.

    See III. 56, note
3.

Epistle
XXXIII.

To Mauricius Augustus.

Gregory to Mauricius Augustus.

The provident piety of my lords, lest perchance
any scandal might be engendered in the unity of Holy Church by the
dissension of priests, has once and again deigned to admonish me to
receive kindly the representatives of my brother and fellow-priest
Cyriacus, and to give them liberty to return soon.  And although,
most pious lord, all your injunctions are suitable and provident, yet I
find that by such an admonition I am reproved as being in your judgment
indiscreet.  But, even though my mind has been wounded in no
slight degree by a proud and profane title, could I possibly be guilty
of so great indiscretion as not to know what I owed to the unity of the
faith and to ecclesiastical concord, and to refuse to receive the
representatives and the synodical letter of my brother on account of
bitterness from whatever cause intervening?  Far be this from
me.  Such wisdom had been unwisdom.  For what is due from us
for conserving unity of faith is one thing; what is due for restraining
elation is another.  Times therefore were to be distinguished,
lest the newness of my aforesaid brother might in any point be
disturbed.  Whence
also I received his representatives with great affection. 
Whatever charity I owed to them I displayed, and honoured them more
than it had been the ancient custom to do, and caused them to celebrate
the sacred solemnities of mass with me; since, even as my deacon ought
not to serve, for exhibition of the sacred mysteries, him who has
either committed the sin of elation or corrects it not himself when
committed by others, so it was right that his ministers should attend,
in the celebration of mass, on me, who, under

the keeping of God, have not fallen into the error of pride.

I have however taken care to admonish earnestly
the same my brother and fellow-bishop that, if he desires to have peace
and concord with all, he must refrain from the appellation of a foolish
title.  As to this, the piety of my lords has charged me in their
orders, saying that offence ought not to be engendered among us for the
appellation of a frivolous name.  But I beseech your imperial
Piety to consider that some frivolous things are very harmless, and
others exceedingly harmful.  Is it not the case that, when
Antichrist comes and calls himself God, it
will be very frivolous, and yet exceedingly pernicious?  If we
regard the quantity of the language used, there are but a few
syllables; but if the weight of the wrong, there is universal
disaster.  Now I confidently say that whosoever calls himself, or
desires to be called, Universal Priest, is in his elation the precursor
of Antichrist, because he proudly puts himself above all others. 
Nor is it by dissimilar pride that he is led into error; for, as that
perverse one wishes to appear as above all men, so whosoever this one
is who covets being called sole priest, he extols himself above all
other priests.  But, since the Truth says, *Every one that
exalteth himself shall be humbled* (Luke xiv. 11; xviii. 14), I know that every kind of
elation is the sooner burst as it is the more inflated.  Let then
your Piety charge those who have fallen into an example of pride not to
generate any offence by the appellation of a frivolous name.  For
I, a sinner, who by the help of God retain
humility, need not to be admonished to humility.  Now may Almighty
God long guard the life of our most serene
Lord for the peace of holy Church and the
advantage of the Roman republic.  For we are sure, that if you
live who fear the Lord of heaven, you will
allow no proud doings to prevail against the truth.

---

    So
literally;—“Ne prædicti fratri mei ex quolibet
articulo novitas turbaretur.”  The meaning seems to be, Lest
Cyriacus should be troubled immediately on his accession.  He was
to be remonstrated with in due time; but rejection at once of his
synodical letter and of his emissaries would have been premature.

Epistle
XXXIV.

To Eulogius, Bishop.

Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria, and
Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch.

The charity wherewith I am greatly bound to you
allows me by no means to keep silence, that your Holiness may know all
that is going on among us, and, deceived by no false rumours, may keep
more perfectly the way of your justice and rectitude, as you have
perfectly begun to do.  Now the representatives
(*responsales*) of our brother and fellow-bishop Cyriacus came to
me, bringing me his synodical epistle.  And indeed between us and
him there is, as your Blessedness knows, serious difference on account
of the appellation of a profane name; but I thought that his
representatives sent in the cause of the faith ought to be received,
lest the sin of elation which has arisen in the Constantinopolitan
Church almost against all priests, might cause a shaking of the faith
and a breach in ecclesiastical unity.  I also caused the same
representatives, inasmuch as they very humbly requested it, to
celebrate with me the solemnities of mass, because, as I have taken
care to intimate to the most serene lord the Emperor, it was right that
the representatives of our brother and fellow priest Cyriacus should
communicate with me, since by God’s help
I have not fallen into the error of elation.  But my deacon ought
not to celebrate the solemnities of mass with our aforesaid-brother
Cyriacus, since, through a profane title, he has either committed or
accedes to the sin of pride; lest if he (my deacon) proceeds with one who is in such a position of
elation, we might seem (which God forbid) to
confirm the vanity of that foolish name.  But I have taken care to
admonish our said brother to correct himself of such elation, since, if
he does not correct it, he will in no way have peace with
us.

Furthermore, our said brother in his synodical
letters has by the grace of God expressed
himself in all respects as a Catholic.  But he has condemned a
certain Eudoxius, whom we find neither condemned in synods, nor
repudiated by his predecessors in their synodical letters.  It is true that the canons of the
council of Constantinople condemn the Eudoxians; but they say nothing
as to who their author Eudoxius was.  But the Roman Church does
not possess so far these same canons, or the acts of that council, nor
has it accepted them, though it has accepted this same synod with
regard to what was defined by it against Macedonius.  It does
certainly repudiate the other heresies therein spoken of, which had
already been condemned by other Fathers:  but so far it knows
nothing about the Eudoxians.  Some things are indeed told in
Sozomen’s history about a certain Eudoxius, who is said to have
usurped the episcopate of the Church of Constantinople.  But this
history itself the Apostolic See refuses to accept, since it contains
many false statements,

and
praises Theodore of Mopsuestia too much, and says that he was a great
doctor of the Church even to the day of his death.  It remains
then that, if any one receives that history, he contradicts the synod
held in the times of Justinian of pious memory concerning the three
chapters.  But one who cannot contradict this synod must needs
reject that history.  Moreover in the Latin language we have so
far found nothing about this Eudoxius, either in Philaster or in the
blessed Augustine, who wrote much about heresies.  Let therefore
your Charity inform me in your letters if any one of the approved
Fathers among the Greeks has made mention of him.

Furthermore three years ago, with reference to the
case of the monks of Isauria, who were accused as being
heretics, my brother and
fellow-bishop the lord John once sent me letters for my satisfaction,
in which he attempted to shew that they had contradicted the
definitions of the synod of Ephesus; and he forwarded to me certain
chapters, purporting to be those of the same synod, which they were
said to oppose.  Now among
other things it was in these chapters asserted concerning the soul of
Adam, that by sin it did not die, in that the devil does not enter into
the heart of man; and that whoso said it was so was anathema. 
When this was read to me I was much grieved.  For if the soul of
Adam, who was the first to sin, did not die by sin, how was it said to
him concerning the forbidden tree, *In the day that ye eat thereof ye
shall surely die* (Gen. ii. 17)?  And certainly Adam and Eve
ate of the forbidden tree, and yet in their flesh they lived afterwards
more than nine hundred years.  It is therefore evident that in his
flesh he did not die.  If then he did not die in his soul, the
impious conclusion follows that God pronounced
a false sentence concerning him, when He said that in the day that he
ate he should die.  But far be this error, far be it from the true
faith.  For what we say is, that the first man died in soul in the
day that he sinned, and that through him the whole human race is
condemned in this penalty of death and corruption.  But through
the second man we trust that we can be freed, both now from the death
of the soul, and hereafter from all corruption of the flesh in the
eternal resurrection:—as moreover we said to the aforesaid
representatives; ‘We say that the soul of Adam died by sin, not
from the substance of living, but from the quality of living. 
For, inasmuch as substance is one thing, and quality another, his soul
did not so die as not to be, but so died as not to be blessed. 
Yet this same Adam returned afterwards to life through
penitence.’

But that the devil enters into the heart of man
cannot be denied, if the Gospel is believed.  For it is there
written, *And after the sop Satan entered into him*
(John xiii.
27).  And again it
is therein also said, *When the devil had now put himself into the
heart of Judas, that Judas should betray Him* (Ibid.
2).  He that denies this
falls into Pelagian heresy.  Seeing then that, having examined the
Ephesine synod, we found nothing of the kind to be contained therein,
we caused to be brought to us also a very old Codex of the same synod
from the Church of Ravenna, and we found it to agree with the report of
the synod which we have so as to differ in no respect, and to contain
nothing else in its decree of anathema and rejection, except that they
reject the twelve chapters of Cyril of blessed memory.  But this
whole argument we set forth much more fully and particularly to his
representatives when they were with us, and most fully satisfied
them.  Wherefore lest either these or any like things should creep
in yonder, so as to cause offence to holy Church, it is necessary for
us to indicate these things to your Holiness.  And, although we
know our brother and fellow-bishop Cyriacus to be orthodox, yet on
account of others we ought to be cautious, that the seeds of error may
be trampled down before they spring up to public view.

I received the letters of your Holiness on the
arrival here of our common son the deacon Sabinianus; but, as their
bearer is already prepared for departure and cannot be detained, I will
reply when the deacon, my *responsalis*, comes.

---

    As to the
first subject of this epistle, with references to others on the same
subject, see *Prolegom*., p. xxii.

    *Procedit*,
the usual term for proceeding to the Holy Table for celebration. 
See III. 57, note 5.

    Cf. VII. 4.

    See III. 53, note
9.

    Cf. VI. 14, where
the same doctrinal questions are similarly discussed in the same
connexion.

Epistle
XXXV.

To Dominicus, Bishop.

Gregory to Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage.

Though we believe that thy Fraternity gives attention
with pastoral vigilance to the care of monasteries, yet we think it
necessary to inform you of what we have learnt about a monastery in the
African province.  Now the abbot Cumquodeus, the bearer of these
presents, complaints that, if at any time he wishes to restrain under
regular discipline the monks over whom he presides, they at once leave
the monastery, and are allowed to wander wherever they will. 
Seeing, then, that this is both altogether pernicious to themselves and
also sets an example of perdition to others, we exhort your Fraternity
that, if it 

is so, you should bring
ecclesiastical censure to bear upon them, and withhold them by suitable
punishment from such undoubted presumption; and that you should so
bring them to obedience by salubrious provision, subduing their proud
minds to the yoke of discipline, that correction may recall from guilt
others whom their example might have provoked to similar transgression,
and teach them to obey their superiors, as is fit.  But, since he
tells us that stray monks are defended by some bishops, let your
Fraternity give careful attention to this, and restrain them by your
menaces in all ways from such defence.  The month of July,
Indiction 15.

---

Epistle XXXVIII.

To Donus, Bishop.

Gregory to Donus, Bishop of Messana
(*Messene*).

The ordinances both of the sacred canons and of
the laws allow the utensils of the Church to be sold for the redemption
of captives.  And so, seeing that Faustinus, the bearer of these
presents, is proved to have contracted a debt of three hundred and
thirty *solidi* for the purpose of redeeming his daughters from
the yoke of captivity, and that, thirty thereof having been repaid, it
is certain that he has not sufficient means for the repayment of the
remaining sum, we exhort thy Fraternity by this communication that thou
by all means give him fifteen pounds, taking his receipt for the same,
out of the silver in thy hands belonging to the Meriensian Church, of
which he is known to be a soldier; so that, it being sold, and the debt
paid, he may be freed from the bond of his obligation.  But of
this also your Fraternity should be careful, that in case of the
aforesaid Church having so much current coin, he should receive from it
the amount above-written; but otherwise you must needs supply him for
the purpose in view with the sum we have stated from the consecrated
vessels.  For, as it is a very serious thing to sell idly
ecclesiastical utensils, so on the other hand it is wrong, under
pressing necessity of this kind, for an exceedingly desolated Church to
prefer its property to its captives, or to loiter in redeeming
them.

---

Epistle
XXXIX.

To John, Bishop.

Gregory to John, Bishop of Syracuse.

Lest attention to secular affairs should disjoin
the hearts of religious men (which God forbid)
from mutual charity, very earnest endeavour should be made to bring any
matter that has come into dispute to the easiest possible
termination.  Since, then, from the information of Cæsarius,
abbot of St. Peter’s monastery, constituted in a place called
Baias, we find that between him and John, abbot of St. Lucia’s
monastery, constituted in the city of Syracuse, there has arisen a
serious question about certain boundaries, we, lest this contention
should be prolonged between them, have taken thought for their dispute
being terminated by the determination of a land-measurer.  And
accordingly we have written to the *defensor* Fantinus, bidding
him direct John the land-measurer, who has gone from Rome to Panormus,
to resort to your Fraternity.

We exhort, therefore, that you go with him to the places
about which there is contention, and, both parties having been brought
together, cause the places in dispute to have their boundaries defined
in your presence, though still with a claim of prescription for forty
years preserved to either party.  But, whatever may be determined,
let it be your Fraternity’s anxious and studious care to have it
so observed that no strife may henceforth be stirred up anew, nor any
further complaint reach us.

We believe that it is not unknown to your Fraternity
that the venerable abbot Cæsarius was formerly our friend; and
therefore, saving equity, we commend him to you in all respects. 
And, seeing that he is entirely inexperienced in secular causes, it is
needful for him to be aided by your solicitude; yet so that, in this as
in all cases, you observe, as is fit, reason and justice.

---

Epistle
XL.

To Eulogius, Bishop.

Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria.

Your most sweet Holiness has spoken much in your letter
to me about the chair of Saint Peter, Prince of the apostles, saying
that he himself now sits on it in the persons of his successors. 
And indeed I acknowledge myself to be unworthy, not only in the dignity
of such as preside, but even in the number of such as stand.  But
I gladly accepted all that has been said, in that he has spoken to me
about Peter’s chair who occupies Peter’s chair.  And,
though special honour to myself in no wise delights me, yet I greatly
rejoiced because you, most holy ones, have given to yourselves what you
have bestowed upon me.  For who can be ignorant that holy Church
has been made firm in the solidity of the Prince of the apostles, who
derived his name from the firmness of his mind, so as to be called
Petrus 

from
*petra*.  And to him it is said by the voice of the Truth,
*To thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven*
(Matth. xvi.
19).  And again it
is said to him, *And when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren* (xxii. 32).  And once more, *Simon,
son of Jonas, lovest thou Me?  Feed my sheep*
(Joh. xxi.
17).  Wherefore
though there are many apostles, yet with regard to the principality
itself the See of the Prince of the apostles alone has grown strong in
authority, which in three places is the See of one.  For he himself exalted the See in
which he deigned even to rest and end the present life.  He
himself adorned the See to which he sent his disciple as
evangelist.  He himself stablished the See in which, though he was
to leave it, he sat for seven years.  Since then it is the See of
one, and one See, over which by Divine authority three bishops now
preside, whatever good I hear of you, this I impute to myself.  If
you believe anything good of me, impute this to your merits, since we
are one in Him Who says, *That they all may be one, as Thou, Father,
art in me, and I in thee that they also may be one in us*
(Joh. xvii.
21).  Moreover, in
paying you the debt of salutation which is due to you, I declare to you
that I exult with great joy from knowing that you labour assiduously
against the barkings of heretics; and I implore Almighty God that He would aid your Blessedness with His
protection, so as through your tongue to uproot every root of
bitterness from the bosom of holy Church, lest it should germinate
again to the hindrance of many, and through it many should be
defiled.  For having received your talent you think on the
injunction, *Trade till I come* (Luke xix. 13).  I therefore, though unable to
trade at all nevertheless rejoice with you in the gains of your trade,
inasmuch as I know this, that if operation does not make me partaker,
yet charity does make me a partaker in your labour.  For I reckon
that the good of a neighbour is common to one that stands idle, if he
knows how to rejoice in common in the doings of the other.

Furthermore, I have wished to send you some
timber:  but your Blessedness has not indicated whether you are in
need of it:  and we can send some of much larger size, but no ship
is sent hither capable of containing it:  and I think shame to
send the smaller sort.  Nevertheless let your Blessedness inform
me by letter what I should do.

I have however sent you, as a small blessing from
the Church of Saint Peter who loves you, six of the smaller sort of
Aquitanian cloaks (*pallia*), and two napkins (*oraria*);
for, my affection being great, I presume on the acceptableness of even
little things.  For affection itself has its own worth, and it is
quite certain that there will be no offence in what out of love one has
presumed to do.

Moreover I have received the blessing of the holy
Evangelist Mark, according to the note appended to your letter. 
But, since I do not drink *colatum*and *viritheum*with pleasure, I venture to ask for
*cognidium*, which last
year, after a long interval, your Holiness caused to be known in this
city.  For we here get from the traders the name of
*cognidium*, but not the thing itself.  Now I beg that the
prayers of your Holiness may support me against all the bitternesses
which I suffer in this life, and defend me from them by your
intercessions with Almighty God.

---

    As to the
view here expressed of the unity of the three Sees of Rome, Antioch,
and Alexandria, see *Prolegom*., p. xii.

   
“Colaticus.  Lapides quoque
medicinalium, mortariarum, et pigmentariarum usibus apti
(*Isid. Lib*. 16. *Orig. cap*. 4).”  Du
Cange.  But *colatum* here appears to have been some
drink.

    *Genus
potionis*, Papiæ, Ægyptios vel
Alexandrinos—Illud forte de quo S. Hieronymus de Vita Clericorum
cum *palmarum fructus exprimuntur in liquorem, coatisque frugibus
aqua pinguior coloratur*.  Du Cange.

    “Potionis
species apud Ægyptianos, vel saltem Alexandrinos.”  Du
Cange.

Epistle XLII.

To Marinianus, Bishop.

Gregory to Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

We find from the information given in your
Fraternity’s letter that the sons of the Church of Cornelium are
continually supplicating you to consecrate a bishop for them in place
of their former bishop who has lapsed, and that you are in doubt as to
what should be done in the matter, and await our plain command. 
Inasmuch, then, as no sort of reason allows any one who has departed
criminally to be recalled to the place from which he has lapsed, and as
the ordinances of the sacred canons allow not a Church to be without a
bishop beyond three months, lest (which God
forbid) the ancient foe should lie in wait to tear the Lord’s flock, your Fraternity ought to comply with
their entreaty, and ordain a bishop in the place of the lapsed
one.  For, seeing that you ought to have admonished them to this
thing by your exhortations before they asked you, you can have no
excuse for refusing them when they demand it of you, since a Church of
God ought not to remain long widowed of a
bishop of its own.

---

Epistle
XLIII.

To Marinianus, Bishop.

Gregory to Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

It has for some time reached us from the 

report of many that the monasteries
constituted in the district of Ravenna are everywhere aggrieved by the
domination of your clergy; so that—grievous to be
said—under the pretext of government they take possession of them
as if they were their own.  Condoling in no small degree with
these monasteries, we sent letters to your predecessor bidding him
correct this evil.  But, seeing that he was soon overtaken by the
close of life, we remember having written in like manner to your
Fraternity, lest this burden on the monasteries should continue. 
And because, as we have discovered, there has been loitering so far in
the correction of this thing, we have thought fit to address you a
second time by this letter.  We exhort you, then, that, putting
aside all delay and all excuses, you so study to relieve these
monasteries from this kind of grievance that clerics, or such as are in
sacred orders, may henceforth have no leave of access to them on any
other ground except only for the purpose of praying, or if perchance
they should be invited for solemnizing the sacred mysteries of
mass.  But, lest haply the monasteries should sustain a burden
through the promotion of any monk or abbot, you must take care that, if
any of the abbots or monks of any monastery should accede to any
clerical office or sacred order, he shall have, as we have said, no
power there any longer, lest under cover of this occasion the
monasteries should be compelled to sustain the burdens which we
prohibit.  Let not your Holiness, then, after this second
admonition, delay correcting all this with vigilant care, lest, if we
should after this perceive you to be negligent (as we do not believe
will be the case), we be compelled to provide otherwise for the quiet
of the monasteries.  For be it known to you that we will no longer
suffer the congregations of the servants of God to be subjected to such requirements.  Lest,
however, any excuse should be put forward with regard to the monks, let
your Fraternity without fail send hither such person as you may see to
be serviceable, and we will depute monks to go with him to you, to
provide for whom you must place them in monasteries, if indeed there
are among you places such as may afford them a
maintenance.

---