Book II.

Epistle III.

To Velox, Magister Militium.

Gregory to Velox, &c.

We informed your Glory some time ago that soldiers
had been prepared to come to your parts; but, inasmuch as your letter
had signified to us that the enemy were collected and were marching
hitherward, we for this reason have detained them here.  But now
it appears to be advantageous that a certain number of soldiers should
be sent to you, whom let thy Glory be careful to admonish and exhort to
be prepared for toil.  And, when you find an opportunity, confer
with our glorious sons Maurilius and Vitalianus, and do whatever, with
the help of God, they may appoint you to do
for the advantage of the republic.  And, should you ascertain that
the unspeakable Ariulph is making an
incursion hitherward or to the parts about Ravenna, do you labour in
his rear, as becomes brave men, to the end that your renown may by
God’s help advance still more in the
republic from the quality of your labour.  This, however, before
all, we admonish you to do:  to release without any delay or
excuse the family of Maloin and Adobin, Vigild and Grussing, who are known to be with the glorious
*Magister militum* Maurilius, to the end that the men of the
aforesaid Maurilius, when they come to your parts, may without any
impediment march along with them.

[In *Colbert*. and *Paul. diac.*, Die.
V. Kal. Oct. Indict. 10.]

---

    Ariulph was
the Lombard Duke of Spoletum, one of the principal cities in Italy
occupied by the Lombards.  For further reference to him cf. II.
29, 30, 46; IX. 98.  He was at this time preparing, and suspected
by Gregory of such intention, for an attack on Rome.  Cf.
*Prologom*.  Velox (to whom this letter is addressed), and
Maurilius and Vitalian (alluded to in it, and addressed in *Epp*.
29, 30), were Roman Generals (*magistri militum*) in
command of imperial forces:  but where they were is not
apparent.  From an allusion to Suana (or *Soana*) as within
reach of the last two they may be supposed to have been somewhere in
Tuscia.

    Apparently a
*familia* of slaves belonging to Velox, but at this time with
Maurilius.

Epistle
VI.

To the Neapolitans.

Gregory to the clergy, nobles, gentry, and
commonalty dwelling at
Naples.

Although the sincere devotion of spiritual sons in
behalf of their mother Church needs no exhortation, nevertheless, it
ought to be stirred up by letter, lest it should suppose itself
slighted.  On this account I approach your love with an admonition
of paternal charity, that with many tears and with one accord we may
render thanks to our Redeemer, who has not suffered you to walk along
pathless ways under so perverse a teacher, but has made publicly known
the crimes of your unworthy pastor.  For Demetrius, to wit, who
even before had not deserved to be called a bishop, has been found to
be involved in transactions to such an extent and of such a kind that,
if he had received judgment without mercy according to the character of
his deeds, he would undoubtedly have been condemned to a most hard
death by both divine and human laws.  But since, being reserved
for penance, he has been deprived of the dignity of the priesthood, we
cannot suffer the Church of God to remain long
without a teacher, since it is laid down by canonical rules that, on
the death or removal of a pastor, the church should not be long
deprived of the priesthood. 
Wherefore, I have thought it necessary to admonish your Charity by this
present writing that neither delay nor the discord which has been wont
to generate scandals ensue to hinder your election of a pontiff. 
But seek you out with all care such a person as all by common consent
may rejoice in, and as is in no respect rejected by the sacred canons;
to the end that the office which the most wicked of men had polluted by
his evil administration may be worthily filled and administered by him,
whoever he may be, who, by the grace of Christ, and with His approval,
shall be ordained.

---

    *Clero,
nobilibus, ordini et plebi.  Ordo* seems to denote persons of
official or other rank, above the commonalty, but below the
nobility.  In some cases the corresponding address is to *clero,
ordini et plebi* (as in I. 81; V. 26); in others to *clero et
nobilibus* only.  All such expressions shew that the election
of bishops rested with the members, laity as well as clergy, of each
church, though the bishop of Rome, wherever his jurisdiction extended
reserved to himself the power of approving or disallowing the
election.  In the election at Naples, referred to in this Epistle,
there appears to have been a difficulty in arriving at an unanimous
choice.  Other Epistles referring to the case are II. 9, 10, 15,
26; III. 35.  From the last of these it appears how it was
eventually settled.  See especially note 6 under II. 9.

   
*Sacerdotii*; meaning here episcopacy.  See I. 78, note
2.

Epistle
VII.

*To Maximianus, Bishop of Syracuse*.

Gregory to Maximianus, &c.

We execute more efficiently our heavenly commission, if
we share our burdens with our brethren.  For this cause we appoint
thee, our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop, to have
administration over all the churches of Sicily in the name of the
Apostolical See, so that whosoever there is reckoned as being in a
condition of religion may by our authority be subject to thy
Fraternity, to the end that it may not hereafter be necessary for them
to make such long sea-voyages in resorting to us for slight
causes.  But if by any chance there are matters of difficulty
which can by no means be settled by the judgment of thy Fraternity, in
these only let our judgment be solicited, that so we may occupy
ourselves more efficaciously in greater causes, being relieved from the
least.  And be it understood that we give this delegation of
authority, not to thy place, but to thy person, because we have learnt
from thy past life what we may presume of thee in thy future
conduct.

The month of December, the tenth Indiction.

---

    Maximianus
had been a monk, and for a time abbot, in Gregory’s monastery of
St. Andrew at Rome, had accompanied him to Constantinople, and been
recommended by him soon after his own accession, and elected Bishop of
Syracuse (*Joan. Diac. Vit. S. Greg*. ii. 11, 12).  He was
highly esteemed by Gregory, and mentioned in his Dialogues as having
been miraculously delivered from shipwreck on his return from
Constantinople to Rome (*Dialog*. iii. 36.  Cf. *Hom*.
34 *in Evang*.).  His appointment now as delegate of the
Roman See in Sicily would relieve Peter the subdeacon of his temporary
jurisdiction over the ecclesiastics there.  Maximianus died in
November, a.d. 594.  See V. 17, 22. 
It is to be observed that the general authority now given to Maximianus
was granted to him personally, and not permanently to the See of
Syracuse.

Epistle
IX.

To the Neapolitans.

Gregory to the gentry and commonalty (*ordini et
plebi*) residing at Naples.

The communication you have addressed to us has
made manifest what your opinion is of our brother and fellow-bishop
Paulus:  and we
congratulate you in that your experience of him for a few days has been
such that you desire to have him as your cardinal bishop.  But, since in matters of supreme
importance there ought to be no hasty decision, so we, Christ helping
us, will arrange after mature deliberation what is to be done
hereafter, his character meanwhile, in course of time, having become
better known to you.

Wherefore, most beloved sons, obey ye the
aforesaid man, if you truly love him, and with devoted minds meet his
wishes in peaceful concurrence, to the end that the affection of your
mutual charity may so bind you to each other, that the enemy who flies
about you raging may find no way through any of you for creeping in to
break up your unanimity.  Further, when we shall have perceived
the aforesaid bishop offering to God the fruit
of souls which we long for, God Himself also
approving, we will do afterwards whatever divine inspiration may
suggest to our heart, with regard to his person and to your
desire.

---

    He was bishop of
Nepe, which as well as Naples, was in the urbicarian province of
Rome.  The filling up of the See of Naples appears to have been a
cause of great anxiety to Gregory, probably because of the party
feeling prevailing in the city.  In his first letter to the
Neapolitans (*supra*, Ep. 6), he had contemplated the speedy
election of a new bishop in the usual way; but it appears from this
Epistle that he had seen reason to defer such election, sending
meanwhile Paulus of Nepe to administer the See.  Some at least in
Naples appear to have wished this Paulus to be elected soon after his
arrival among them; but this Gregory would not allow till he could see
better how things were going.  Such provisional arrangement
continued, it seems, for more than a year, another bishop having been
commissioned to supply Paul’s place in his own Church of Nepe
against the Easter festival (II. 26).  That Gregory’s fear
of opposition to Paul were justified appears from the subsequent
mention of a violent attack made on him by a party opposed to him at
Naples (III. 1).  He meanwhile, not liking his position, had
already been anxious to return to his own see (II. 15), but had not
been allowed.  When he went at last, it seems that an election had
taken place, but had proved futile from the person chosen having
refused to be ordained (III. 15).  Eventually the election had
taken place, by Gregory’s direction, not at Naples, but at Rome
(III. 35), one Fortunatus being chosen (III. 61).  The whole
history of the case illustrates the troubles incident to popular
election of bishops at that time, especially in great
cities.

    See I. 79, note 5.

Epistle
X.

*To Paulus, Bishop of Naples*.

Gregory to Paulus, &c.

If we administer safely the priestly office which
we have received, without doubt both Divine assistance and the
affection of our spiritual sons will not be wanting to us. 
Wherefore let thy Fraternity take care to shew thyself in all things
such that the testimony which the clergy, the nobility, and all the
people together, of the city of Naples bears to thee may be
strengthened by the increase of thy goodness.  Thou oughtest,
then, so to bind thyself to continual employment in exhorting the
aforesaid people that the Divine husbandman may store in his garners
the fruit of thy word, which thou shalt have gathered from them by thy
labours.  But till such time as we shall be able, God revealing to us His will, to deliberate concerning the
things which our aforesaid sons request us should be done, we grant
leave for clerics to be ordained from the ranks of the laity, and also
for manumissions to be solemnly celebrated before thee in the same
church.  Moreover we desire thee to observe without hesitation the
customs of the clerical order and of the presbyters

of the above-named church: 
and do thou also keep such diligent watch in the instruction of the
same, that, abstaining from all that is unsuitable or unlawful, they
may stand fast, under thy exhortations, ministering with due obedience,
in the service of our God.  The month of
January, the tenth Indiction.

---

    Though called here
Episcopus Neapolitanus, it is apparent from this and other Epistles
that he was as yet only the episcopal visitor, not the regular, or
cardinal, bishop of Naples.

Epistle XII.

To Castorius, Bishop of Ariminum.

Gregory to Castorius, &c.

The illustrious lady Timothea has intimated to us
by a petitionary notification, as is set forth below, that she has
founded an oratory within the city of Ariminum in a place belonging to
her, which she desires to have consecrated in honour of the holy
cross.  And, accordingly, dearest brother, if the said
construction is in the jurisdiction of thy city, and if it is known
that no body has been buried there, then, after reception in the first
place of a legitimate endowment, that is, of two-thirds of her whole
property (excepting slaves), of her movables and fixtures and live
stock, the usufract being reserved to her for her life, and such
endowment having been secured by municipal deeds, thou wilt solemnly
consecrate the aforesaid oratory without any public mass, on the
condition that no baptistery shall be constructed in the same place in
future times, and that thou appoint not a cardinal presbyter.  And if perchance she should prefer
having masses said there, let her know that she must ask thy Love for a
presbyter, to the end nothing else may be presumed by any other priest
whatever.  Further, thou wilt reverently deposit the holy
things she has
provided.

---

    See I. 79, note
5.

    *Sanctuaria*,
meaning apparently relics, the deposition of which usually accompanied
the consecration of holy places.

Epistle
XV.

To Paul, Bishop.

Gregory to Paul, &c.

I appointed thy Fraternity to preside for the
present over the church of Naples, to the end that thou mightest
convert all thou canst to God by persuasive
preaching.  And, while thou oughtest to be giving thy whole mind
to this work, thou art in haste to return before bringing forth this
fruit to the Lord, and requestest me to settle
the affairs of this same church speedily, my mind being meanwhile by no
means unoccupied in this matter.  But, being desirous of
fortifying securely the well-being of this Church, I hold it needful to
consider the matter with long continued deliberation, so as to be able
to arrange its affairs by the ordination of a worthy whom Christ may
reveal to us.  Wherefore let thy Fraternity meanwhile study to
watch for the good of souls, so that the opinion I have of thee may be
strengthened by the effect of thy working.  All thou hast written
concerning the deacon Peter has now been made known to us by the
ex-consul Theodorus.  And so, now that I know that he is constant
to thee, and, according to thy testimony, studies the advantage of the
Church, he ought to be afraid of no one’s opposition or enmity,
but persevere in benefiting the Church and serving God all the more watchfully as he feels that others have a
grudge against him; that so they may have no power at all to injure
him.  Moreover, thy Fraternity ought not hereafter to be suspected
with regard to him; since no surreptitious proceedings will have effect
on me.

---

    For the occasion of
this letter, see II. 9, note 6.

Epistle XVIII.

*To Natalis, Bishop of Salona*.

Gregory to Natalis, &c.

I have learnt, dearest brother, from many who have
come from thy city that, neglecting thy pastoral charge, thou occupiest
thyself wholly in feastings:  which report I should not have
believed had not my own experience of thy conduct confirmed it. 
For that thou in no wise art intent on reading, in no wise givest
attention to exhortation, but art even ignorant of the very use and
purpose of ecclesiastical order, there is this in evidence, that thou
knowest not how to observe reverence to those who are put over
thee.  For, when thou hadst been forbidden in writing by our
predecessor of holy memory to retain in thy heart the soreness of thy
long displeasure against Honoratus thy archdeacon, and when this had
been positively interdicted thee by myself also, thou, disregarding the
commands of God, and setting at naught our
letters, didst attempt by a cunning device to degrade the aforesaid
Honoratus thy archdeacon under colour of promoting him to a higher
dignity.  Thus it was contrived that, he being removed from the
post of archdeacon, thou mightest call in another who would have fallen
in with thy manner of life, the aforesaid man having, as I think,
displeased thee for no other cause but that he prevented thee from
giving sacred vessels and vestments to thy relations.  Which case
both I now, and my predecessor of holy memory formerly, have wished to
subject to an accurate investigation; but thou, being conscious of what
thou hadst done,

hast
put off sending hither a representative instructed for trial of the
case.  Wherefore let thy Fraternity, even after admonition so
often repeated, repent of the error of thy wrongdoing, and restore the
aforesaid Honoratus to his post immediately on the receipt of my
letter.  Which if thou shouldest defer doing, know that the use of
the pallium, granted thee by this See, is taken from thee.  But
if, even when thou hast lost the pallium, thou still persistest in thy
contumacy, know that thou art deprived of participation of the body and
blood of the Lord.  And after this it
will be needful for us to enquire more fully into the charges against
thee, and to consider with the utmost care and investigation whether
thou shouldest retain even thy episcopate.  Him also who, against
the rule of justice, has consented to be promoted to the place of
another we depose from the dignity of the said archdeaconry.  And,
should he presume any longer to minister in this same office, let him
know that he is deprived of participation in holy communion.  Do
thou, therefore, dearest brother, in no wise provoke us further, lest,
having set us at naught when in an attitude of charity towards thee,
thou shouldest find us very hard in our severity.  Having,
therefore, restored the archdeacon Honoratus to his place, send to us
with speed a person instructed in the case, who may be able to shew to
me by his allegations how the matter should be equitably proceeded
with.  For we have commanded the said archdeacon to come to us,
that, having heard the assertions of the parties, we may come to
whatever decision may be just and well-pleasing to Almighty
God.  For we defend no one on the ground
of personal love, but, God helping us, keep
the rule of justice, putting aside respect to any man’s
person.

---

    Salona was the
metropolis of the province of Dalmatia in the diocese of Illyricum
Occidentale, and Natalis, in virtue of his occupancy of the See, the
Ecclesiastical Metropolitan of the province.  For Gregory’s
subsequent dealings with this bishop see II. 19, 20, 52; III. 8,
32.  For the occasion of this Epistle, see I. 19, note 5.

Epistle
XIX.

To all the Bishops of Dalmatia.

Gregory to all the bishops constituted throughout
Dalmatia.

Though desiring to visit your Fraternity
frequently through the intercourse of letters, yet, when some special
case demands our attention, we wish to take the opportunity of
fulfilling two duties at once, so as both to refresh our brotherly
souls in the way of visitation and to explain accurately matters that
come up for notice, lest ignorance of them should leave the mind
confused.  Now when our brother Natalis, bishop of the city of
Salona, wished to advance the archdeacon Honoratus to the order of the
priesthood, who thereupon declined being advanced to a higher order,
the latter demanded my predecessor of holy memory, in a petition that
he sent, that he should not be so advanced against his will.  For
he alleged that the thing was attempted, not for the sake of promoting
him, but in consequence of displeasure against him.  Thereupon our
predecessor of holy memory addressed letters to Natalis, our brother
and fellow-bishop, interdicting him from promoting the archdeacon
Honoratus against his will, or retaining in his heart the soreness of
the displeasure which he had conceived against him.  And when we
too had laid the same interdiction on the said Natalis, he, not only
disregarding the commands of God, but also
setting at naught our letters, attempted, it is said, craftily to
degrade the aforesaid archdeacon, in a way contrary to custom, under
colour of promoting him to a higher dignity.  Thus it was
contrived that, having removed him from the archdeaconry, he might call
in another person to minister in the place of the deposed
archdeacon.  Now we think that this Honoratus may have fallen
under the displeasure of his bishop on account of having prevented him
from giving sacred vessels to his relations:  and both my
predecessor of holy memory formerly and I now have wished to
investigate the case accurately; but he, conscious of what he had done,
has put off sending a representative with a view to its trial, lest the
truth with respect to his doings might appear.  We therefore, now
that he has been already so often admonished by letter, and has so far
been pertinaciously obstinate, have taken order for his being
admonished once more in letters sent to him through the bearer of these
presents, to the end that he may, immediately on the arrival of the
bearer of these presents, receive the archdeacon Honoratus into his
former place.  And if, with heart still hardened, he should
contumaciously defer restoring him to the said position, we order that
for his contumacy so many times exhibited he be deprived of the use of
the pallium granted to him by this See.  But if, even after loss
of the pallium, he should persevere in the same pertinacity, we order
him to be debarred from participation in the body and blood of the
Lord.  For it is right that he should
find those severe in justice whom he set at naught when they approached
him in charity.  Wherefore neither do we now deviate from the path
of justice, which the aforesaid bishop has despised; but, when he whose
guilt has by no means been made apparent to us has been restored to his
place, we enjoin the bishop Natalis to send to us a person with
instructions, who may be able by his allegations to prove to us the
right intentions of the said bishop.  For we have caused also the
said archdeacon to come to us, that, having heard the assertions of
both parties, we may

decide whatever may be just, whatever may
be well pleasing to Almighty God.  For we
defend no one on the ground of personal love, but, God helping us, keep the rule of justice without respect
to any man’s person.

---

Epistle
XX.

*To Antoninus, Subdeacon*.

Gregory to Antoninus, &c.

Honoratus, archdeacon of the Church of Salona, had
demanded from my predecessor of holy memory, in a petition that he
sent, that he should by no means be forced by his bishop to be advanced
against his will, in a way contrary to custom, to a higher order.

[*Here follows an account of the subsequent
proceedings, almost word for word the same as that given in Epistle
XIX*.]

Wherefore we have thought it right to support thy
Experience by the authority of this present order, that thou mayest
resort to Salona, and at least try by exhortation to induce Natalis,
our brother and fellow-bishop, who has been admonished by so many
letters, to restore the above-mentioned Honoratus to his place
immediately.  But if, as has been his wont, he should
contumaciously delay doing this, forbid him by authority of the
Apostolic See the use of the pallium which has been granted him by this
See.  But if, even after loss of the pallium, thou shouldest find
him persevering in the same pertinacity, thou shalt deprive the said
bishop of participation in holy communion.  Moreover, him who,
against the rule of justice, has consented to be promoted to another
man’s place we order to be deposed from the dignity of the same
archdeaconry.  And, if he should presume to minister further in
the same place, we deprive him of participation in holy
communion.  For it is right that he should find those severe in
justice whom he sets at naught when approaching him in charity. 
Wherefore, when the archdeacon Honoratus has been restored to his
place, let the aforesaid bishop, at thy instigation, send to us a
person with instructions, who may be able by his allegations to prove
to us that the bishop’s intention is or has been just.

[*What follows corresponds exactly with the
conclusion of Epistle XIX*.]

As to our brother and fellow-bishop
Malchus, thou wilt take
care to make him find a surety, that he may come to us as soon as
possible, to the end that, without any delay or loitering, he may
render us an account of his proceedings, and so be able to return to
his own with security.

---

    This Antoninus was
*rector patrimonii* in Dalmatia (see III. 22), and, though but a
subdeacon, appears to have had the same kind of jurisdiction over the
clergy given him in the pope’s name even in ecclesiastical
matters as had been committed to Peter the subdeacon in Sicily. 
(See I. 1.)

    This Malchus was a
bishop in Dalmatia (cf. Lib. 1. Ep. 38, “Ad Malchum episcopum
Dalmatia,”) and appears to have been in charge of some part of
the patrimony there, for his administration of which he had been called
to account, and was therefore summoned to Rome to clear himself. 
He died there suddenly after his case had been heard, and judgment had
been given against him, Gregory being calumniously accused of having
caused his death.  His case is referred to II. 20, 46; III. 22,
47; IV. 47.

Epistle XXII.

*To all the Bishops of Illyricum.*

Gregory to all the bishops, &c.

It both affords us joy for your carefulness, and
makes your Fraternity safe in your own ordination, if the order of
ancient custom is maintained.  Since, then, we have learnt from
the letters which you have sent to us through the presbyter Maximianus
and the deacon Andreas that the consent of all of you and the will of
the most serene Prince have concurred in the person of our brother and
fellow-bishop John, we feel great exultation that, under God’s direction, such a one has been advanced to the
office of priesthood as the judgment of
all has approved as worthy.  Wherefore, in accordance with your
request, we confirm our aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop by the
authority of our assent in the order of priesthood wherein he has been
constituted, and declare our ratification of his consecration by
sending him the pallium.  And since, according to custom, we have
committed to him vicariate jurisdiction in our stead, we must of
necessity take the precaution of exhorting your Fraternity that you in
no wise hesitate to obey him in matters pertaining to ecclesiastical
order and the right course of discipline, or in other things not
precluded by canonical decrees; that the soundness of your judgment in
electing him may be declared by the obedience which you
shew.

---

    This Epistle, as
appears from the following one, was on the occasion of the election of
John to the See of Justiniana Prima in Eastern Illyricum, which, though
annexed by the Emperor Gratian (379) to the Eastern Empire, had
remained under the spiritual control of the Roman See. 
Accordingly Pope Damasus had assigned to the bishop of Thessalonica
vicariate jurisdiction under Rome over the new
præfecture:  and this arrangement had continued to the
time of Pope Vigilius, when the Emperor Justinian assigned to Achrida,
called by him Justiniana Prima, Metropolitan jurisdiction over the five
provinces of the Dacian civil diocese with the two Pannonias in the
diocese of Illyricum Occidentale (*Justin. Novell*. cxxxi. c.
iii.).  Hence Justiniana Prima became the seat thenceforth of the
ecclesiastical Vicariate also.  The election to the See, being a
metropolitan one, appears to have been made in this instance by the
suffragan bishops with the concurrence of the Emperor; after which the
Bishop of Rome was applied to for confirmation.  In the case
before us it was readily given, the pallium sent, and the vicariate
jurisdiction renewed.  A case will appear below in which such
confirmation was refused, but dispensed with by the Emperor, who
supported the elected bishop against the Pope.  See III. 47, note
1.

    *Sacerdotii*,
meaning here episcopacy.  See I. 78, note 1.

Epistle
XXIII.

To John, Bishop.

Gregory to John, Bishop of Prima Justiniana in
Illyricum.

It is clearly a manifest evidence of goodness that
the consent of all should concur in the election of one person. 
Since, then, the account which we have received from our brethren and
fellow-bishops declared that you are summoned to the position of
priesthood by the unanimous consent of the whole council and the will
of the most serene Prince, we have rendered thanks with great
exultation to Almighty God our Creator, who
has made your life and actions so commendable in the past as to bring
about (what is exceedingly to your credit) your approving yourself to
the judgment of all.  With them we also fully agree with regard to
the person of your Fraternity.  And we implore Almighty
God that, as His Grace has chosen your
Charity, so He would keep you in all respects under His
protection.  We have sent you the pallium according to custom,
and, renewing our commission, we appoint you to act as vicar of the
Apostolic See, admonishing you that you so shew yourself gentle to your
subjects that they may be provoked to love you rather than to fear
you.  And, if perchance any fault of theirs should require notice,
you will be careful so to correct their transgressions as by no means
to discard paternal affection from your mind.  Be watchful and
assiduous in the care of the flock committed to you, and strict in the
zeal of discipline, so that the wolf lying in wait may not prevail to
disturb the Lord’s sheepfold, or have
opportunity for deceit, so as to hurt the sheep.  Make haste with
full purpose of heart to win souls to our God;
and know that we have received the name of shepherd not for repose, but
for labour.  Let us, then, shew forth in our work what our name
denotes.  If we weigh with right consideration the prerogative of
the priesthood, it will be to those who are diligent and do their duty
well for honour, but to those who are negligent assuredly for a
burden.  For, as this name, in the sight of God, conducts those who labour and are assiduous for the
salvation of souls to eternal glory, so in the case of the idle and
sluggish it tends to punishment.  Through our tongue let the
people committed to us learn that there is another life.  Let the
teaching of your Fraternity be to them an acceptable spur to urge them
on, and your life an example for imitation.  For your
Fraternity’s preaching should disclose to them what to love and
what to fear, and your efficiency in this way should reap the fruit of
eternal retribution.  But let your deliberate care especially
constrain you never to attempt to make any unlawful ordinations; but,
whenever any are promoted to the clerical order, or, it may be, to some
higher rank, let them be ordained, not for bribes or entreaties, but
for merit.  In no ordination let any consideration, in any way
whatever, surreptitiously reach your Fraternity, lest you should be
entangled (which God forbid) in the snares of
simoniacal heresy.  *For what shall it profit a man*, as the
Truth says, *if he shall gain the whole word, and lose his own
soul* (Mark viii.
36)?  Hence it is
necessary for us to look to God in all we do,
to despise temporal and perishable things, and to direct the desire of
our heart to the good things of eternity.  Your Holiness’s
present I was altogether
unwilling to accept, since it were very unseemly for us to seem to have
received gifts from our plundered and afflicted brethren.  But
your messengers got the better of me by another argument, proffering it
to one from whom your Fraternity’s offerings may not be
withheld.  For this
you ought before all things to study:  how you may provide
imperishable gifts to be offered to the coming judge of souls, to the
end that He may have respect both to you for your profitable labour,
and to us likewise for our exhortation.

---

    *Xenia*. 
The term denotes, among other kinds of presents, such as were
voluntarily offered to superiors, as by the people of a province to
proconsuls.  Those here referred to were such as it was the custom
for bishops to send to the Pope after their ordination or from time to
time.  We find other instances of Gregory deprecating such
presents.  “The temporal *Xenia* which you have sent
us, though we are in no need of such, we have nevertheless accepted
with due charity.”  (VI. 64, *Ad Dominicam episcopum
Carthaginensem*.)  The word is used also for presents of all
kinds.  Cf. e.g. the letter to Ethelbert (XI. 66).

    Meaning St.
Peter.

Epistle
XXVI.

To John, Bishop.

Gregory to John, &c.

Inasmuch as we have enjoined on our brother and
fellow-bishop Paulus the work of the visitation of the Neapolitan
church, therefore let not Fraternity shrink from assuming the
visitation of the Nepesine Church, to the end that, according to the
requirements of the Paschal festivity, whatever the solemnity of divine
service demands may, through thy operation, be in all respects
fulfilled.  Until, then, we may be able to consider what should be
done with regard to our aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop, let thy
Fraternity strive to shew thyself so skilful and vigilant in all things
that the absence of the bishop aforesaid may not at all be
felt.

The month of April, the tenth Indiction.

---

    See II. 9, note
6.

Epistle XXVII.

*To Rusticiana, Patrician*.

Gregory to Rusticiana, &c.

On receiving the epistle of your Excellency I was
relieved by the welcome news of your welfare, hoping that the
Lord in His mercy may protect and direct your
life and doings.  But I wondered much why you have turned from
your intention and vow to accomplish a good work in respect of your
meditated journey to the holy places, seeing that,
when anything good is by the gift of the Creator conceived in the
heart, it is needful that it be carried out with quick devotion, lest,
while the cunning plotter strives to ensnare the soul, he should
afterwards suggest impediments, whereby the mind, weakened by
occupations, may fail to carry its desires into effect.  Whence it
is necessary that your Excellency should anticipate all impediments
that come in the way of pious designs, and gasp after the fruit of good
work with all the efforts of your heart, that so you may succeed in
living tranquilly in the present world and gaining possession of a
heavenly kingdom in the future.  But as to what you have written
to us of Passivus having attempted to spread some calumnies against
you, consider, on the other hand, that the most pious emperors have not
only been unwilling to listen to them, but have also received the
author of them roughly; and turn the whole hope of your soul to Him Who
powerfully prevents men in this world from doing as much harm as they
long to do, that so He may beat back the wicked intentions of men by
the opposition of His arm, and Himself mercifully shatter their
attempts, as He has been wont to do.  I entreat that the glorious
Lord Appio and the lady Eusebia, the
Lord Eudoxius and the lady Gregoria, be
greeted in my name through you.

---

    Other letters
addressed to this patrician lady are IV. 46; VIII. 22; XI. 44; XIII.
22.  She appears to have been a widow, no husband being alluded
to, who had migrated with her family from Rome to Constantinople (cf.
VIII. 22, and XIII. 22).  She is spoken of in subsequent letters
as a person of slender frame and weak health, and subject to
gout.  Her family, to whom greetings are always sent, being her
children either by birth or marriage, were Appio and Eusebia, Eudoxius
and Gregoria, the former, and perhaps the latter also, being a married
couple.  Strategius also, a son of Appio and Eusebia, apparently a
child, has afterwards greetings sent to him.  They had daughters
also, whose names are not given.

    Two years later
(see IV. 46, Indict. XII. i.e. a.d.
593–4) she appears to have made a pilgrimage to Mount
Sinai.

Epistle XXIX.

*To Maurilius and Vitalianus*.

Gregory to Maurilius and Vitalianus, *magistris
militum*.

On receiving your Glory’s letters we gave
thanks to God that we were assured of your
safety; and we greatly rejoiced at your careful provision; and what you
wrote about was at once prepared.  But the magnificent Aldio wrote
to us after the arrival of your men that Ariulph was already near at
hand, and we feared that the soldiers sent to you might fall into his
hands.  Yet here also, so far as God may
give aid, our son the glorious *magister militum* has prepared
himself against him.  But, if the enemy himself should advance
hither, let your Glory also, as you have been accustomed to do,
accomplish what you can in his rear.  For we hope in the power of
Almighty God, and that of the blessed Peter
himself, the Prince of the apostles, on whose anniversary he desires to
shed blood, that he may find him also without delay opposed to
him.

---

    Cf. II. 3.

Epistle
XXX.

To Maurilius and Vitalianus.

Gregory to Maurilius and Vitalianus, *magistris
militum*.

We have entreated your Glory through our son
Vitalianus both by word and letter, charging you to communicate with
him.  But on the eleventh day of the month of January Ariulph sent us this letter which we
forward to you.  Wherefore, when you have read it, see if the
people of Suana have stood fast
in the fidelity they promised to the republic, and take adequate
hostages from them, such as you can rely on; and moreover bind them
anew by oaths, restoring to them what you took from them in the way of
a pledge, and bringing them to a right mind by your discourses. 
But, should you quite distinctly ascertain that they have treated with
Ariulph about their surrender to him, or at any rate have given him
hostages, as the letter of Ariulph which we have forwarded to you leads
us to suspect, then (after wholesome deliberation, lest your souls or
mine be burdened with respect to our oaths), do ye whatever ye may
judge to be of advantage to the republic.  But let your Glory so
act that neither anything be done for which we could be blamed by our
adversaries, nor (which may the Lord avert)
anything neglected which the advantage of the republic requires. 
Furthermore, my glorious sons, take anxious heed, since the enemy, so
far as I have ascertained, has an army collected, and is said to be
stationed at Narina; and if,
God being

angry with him, he should resolve to bend
his course hitherward, do you plunder his positions so far as the
Lord may aid you, or certainly let those whom
you send carefully require night-watches,
lest news of any sad event should reach us.

---

    “Abest
hæc Epist. a plerisque mss.”  (*Benedict Ed*.)

    In Collect.
Pauli Diac., *Junii*.  (*Ibid*.)

    Or Soana, a town in
Tuscia.

    Perhaps Narnia, in
Umbria.

   
*Sculcas*.  Sculcæ,
excubiæ; pro exulcæ vocabulo truncato, ut *cubiæ*
pro *excubiæ*.  Du Cange.

    In
*Colbert. Vet*. the date is added, “Die 14 Kal. Jan. Indict.
10.”  The dates are evidently uncertain.

Epistle XXXII.

To Peter, Subdeacon of Sicily.

Gregory to Peter, &c.

By information received from Romanus the guardian
(*defensore*) I have learnt that the monastery of
handmaidens of God which is on the farm of
Monotheus has suffered wrong from our church of Villa Nova with respect
to a farm belonging to the latter, which is said to have been leased to
the said monastery.  If this is so, let thy Experience restore to
them the farm, and also the payments from the same farm for the two
indictions during which thou hast exacted them.  Moreover, since
many of the Jews dwell on the estates of the Church, I desire that, if
any of them should be willing to become Christians, some little of
their dues be remitted to them, to the end that others also, incited by
this benefit, may be moved to a like desire.

Cows which are now barren from age, or bulls which
appear to be quite useless, ought to be sold, so that at least some
profit may accrue from their price.  But as to the herds of mares
which we keep very unprofitably, I wish them all to be dispersed, and
four hundred only of the younger kept for breeding; which four hundred
ought to be presented to the farmers—so
many to each, to the end that they may make some return to us from them
in successive years:  for it is very hard for us to spend sixty
*solidi* on the herdsmen, and not get sixty pence from these same
herds.  Let then thy Experience so proceed that some may be
divided among all the farmers, and others dispersed and converted into
money.  But so arrange with the herdsmen themselves throughout our
possessions that they may be able to make some profit by cultivation of
the ground.  All the implements which, either at Syracuse or at
Panormus, can be claimed by the Church must be sold before they perish
entirely from age.

On the arrival of the servant of God, brother Cyriacus, at Rome I questioned him closely as
to whether he had communicated with thee about the receiving of a bribe
in the cause of a certain woman.  And the same brother says that
he had learnt the state of the case from thy telling him, for that he
had been commissioned by thee to ascertain who was the person
commissioned to pay the bribe.  This I believed, and immediately
received him familiarly into favour, introduced him to the people and
clergy, increased his stipend, placed him in a
superior rank among the guardians, praising his fidelity before all, in
that he had acquitted himself so faithfully in thy service; and I have
consequently sent him back to thee.  But, inasmuch as thou art in
great haste, and I, though sick, am desirous of seeing thee, do thou
leave some one whom thou hast fully proved to take thy place in the
Syracusan district, and thyself make haste to come to me, that, if it
should please Almighty God, we may consult
together as to whether thou thyself oughtest to return thither or
another person should be appointed in thy place.  At the same time
I have sent Benenatus the notary to occupy thy place in the patrimony
in the district of Panormus till such time as Almighty God may ordain what pleases Him.

I have strongly rebuked Romanus for his levity,
because in the Guest-house (*xenodochium*) which he kept, as I
have now discovered, he has been taken up more with his own profits
than with [heavenly] rewards.  Him, therefore, if it should haply
seem good to thee, leave in thy place.  See how thou mayest best
fortify him, by alarming and admonishing him, that he may act kindly
and carefully towards the peasants (*rusticos*); and shew himself towards strangers and
townspeople changed and active.  In saying this, however, I am not
selecting any person, but leave this to thy judgment.  It is
enough for me to have selected an occupier of thy place in the district
of Panormus; and I wish thee to see thyself to providing one for the
Syracusan district.  When thou comest, bring with thee the moneys
and ornaments (*ornamenta*) on the part, or of the substance of
Antoninus.  Bring also the payments of the ninth and tenth
indictions which thou hast exacted, and with them all thy
accounts.  Take care, if it should please God, to cross the sea for this city before the anniversary
of Saint Cyprian, lest any danger should ensue (which

God
forbid) from the constellation which always threatens the sea at that
season.

Furthermore, I would have thee know that I have no
slight compunctions of mind for having been grievously set against the
servant of God Pretiosus for no grievous fault
of his, and driven him from me, sad and embittered.  And I wrote
to the Lord bishop
requesting him to send the man to me, if willing to do so; but he was
altogether unwilling.  Now him I ought not to distress, nor can I
do so; since, occupied as he is in the causes of God, he ought to be supported by comfort, not depressed by
bitterness.  But the said Pretiosus, as I hear, is altogether
distressed because he cannot return to me.  I, however, as I have
said, cannot distress the Lord bishop, who is
not willing to send him, and I am doubtful between the two.  Do
thou then, if in thy little diminutive body thou hast the greater
wisdom, manage the matter so that I may have my will, and the
Lord bishop be not distressed.  Yet, if
thou see him to be at all distressed, say no more about it.  I
have, however, taken it amiss that he has excommunicated the
Lord Eusebius, a man of so great age and in such bad
health.  Wherefore it is needful for thee to speak privately to
the said Lord bishop, that he be not hasty in
pronouncing sentences, since cases which are to be decided by sentences
must needs be weighed beforehand with careful and very frequent
consideration.

When the recruiting officers come, who, as I hear, are already
raising recruits in Sicily, charge thy substitute to offer them some
little present, so as to render
them well-disposed towards him.  But, before thou comest away,
give also something, according to ancient custom, to the
prætor’s officials; but do it by the hands of him thou
leavest in thy place, so as to conciliate their favour towards
him.  Also, lest we should seem to them to be at all uncivil,
direct thy substitutes to carry out in all respects the orders we have
given to thy Experience as to what is to be given to any individuals or
monasteries.  But when thou comest, we will, with the help of
God consider together how these things should
be arranged.  The three hundred *solidi* which I sent to be
given through thee to the poor I do not think ought to be committed to
their discretion.  Let them carry out, then, those directions I
have spoken of with reference to particular places and
persons.

Now I remember having written before now to say that the
legacies, which, according to the representation of Antoninus the
guardian (*defensoris*), are due from us to monasteries or others,
were to be paid as had been appointed.  And I know not why thy
Experience has delayed to accomplish this.  Wherefore we desire
thee to pay in full our portion of these legacies from the moneys of
the church, that when thou comest to me, thou mayest not leave there
the groans of the poor against thee.  Bring also with thee at the
same time the securities which have been found relating to the
substance of the same Antoninus.

I have learnt on the information of Romanus that the
wife of Redemptus, when dying, directed by word of mouth one silver
shell to be sold, and the proceeds given to her freedmen, and also left
a silver platter to a certain monastery; in respect of both of which
bequests we desire her wishes to be fully carried out, lest from the
least things we be betrayed into greater sins.

Further, I have learnt on the information of the
Abbot Marinianus that the building in the Prætorian Monastery is
not yet even half completed:  which being the case, what can we
praise for it but thy Experience’s fervour?  But even now let this admonition
rouse thee; and, as far as thou canst, assert thyself in the
construction of this same monastery.  I said that nothing was to
be given them for the cost; but I did not prohibit their building the
monastery.  But so proceed as to enjoin in all ways on him whom
thou mayest depute in thy place at Panormus that he construct this same
monastery at the charge of the ecclesiastical revenue, and that I may
have no more private complaints from the abbot.

Moreover, I have learnt that thou knowest certain
things on the farms, even in considerable numbers, to belong to others;
but, owing to the entreaty of certain persons or to timidity, thou art
afraid to restore them to their owners.  But, if thou wert truly a
Christian, thou wouldest be afraid of the judgment of God more than of the voices of men.  Take notice that
I unceasingly admonish thee on this matter; which if thou neglect to
set right, thou wilt have also my voice for witness against thee. 
If thou shouldest find any of the laity fearing God who might receive the tonsure and become agents under
the rector, I give my full
con

sent.  It will be
necessary that letters also be sent to them.

Concerning the case of the son of Commissus the
*scholasticus*, thou hast
taken advice; and it appears that what he claims is not just in
law.  We are unwilling to burden the poor to their disadvantage;
but, inasmuch as he has given himself trouble in this matter, we desire
thee to give him fifty *solidi*, which must certainly be charged
in thy accounts.  As to the expense thou hast incurred on the
business of the Church in the case of Prochisus, either reimburse
thyself there out of his revenues, or, should his revenues be clearly
insufficient for the repayment, thou must needs receive what is due to
thee here from the deacon.  But presume not to say anything about
Gelasius the subdeacon, since his crime calls for the severest penance
even to the end of his life.

Furthermore, thou has sent me one sorry nag and
five good asses.  That nag I cannot ride, he is such a sorry one;
and those good asses I cannot ride, because they are asses.  But
we beg that, if you are disposed to content us, you will let us have
something suitable.  We desire thee to give to the abbot Eusebius
a hundred *solidi* of gold, which must certainly be charged in thy
accounts.  We have learnt that Sisinnius, who was a judge at
Samnium, is suffering from grievous want in Sicily, to whom we desire
thee to supply twenty *decimates* of wine and four *solidi*
yearly.  Anastasius, a religious person
(*religiosus*), is said to be
living near the city of Panormus in the oratory of Saint Agna, to whom
we desire six *solidi* of gold to be given.  We desire also
six *solidi*, to be charged in thy accounts, to be given to the
mother of Urbicus the Prior.  As to the
case of the handmaiden of God, Honorata, what
seems good to me is this:  that thou shouldest bring with thee
when thou comest all her substance which evidently existed before the
time of the episcopate of John, bishop of Laurinum.  But let the same handmaiden of
God come with her son, that we may speak with
her, and do whatever may please God.  The
volume of the Heptateuch out of the
goods of Antoninus we desire to be given to the Prætorian
monastery, and the rest of his books to be brought hither by
thee.

---

   
*Conductores*.  See I. 44, note 6.

   
*Presbyterium*.  The term, as here used, means apparently a
pecuniary allowance to presbyters.  Cf. V. 33, *Ad Gaudentiam
Episcopum*; “Fraternitatem tuam præsentibus
hortamur affatibus ut clericis Capuanæ Ecclesiæ quartam in
*presbyterium* eorum de hoc quod ante dictæ ecclesiæ
singulis annis accesserit juxta antiquam consuetudinem distribuere
secundum personarum studeat qualitatem, quatenus aliquod stipendiorum
habentes solatium, ministerium officiumque suum circa eamdem ecclesiam
devotiore mente provocentur impendere.”

    See I. 44, note
1.

    Maximianus (as
appears from Epistle 34), whom Gregory had himself appointed bishop of
Syracuse.  Cf. II. 7, and note.

    This
Eusebius was an abbot in Sicily.  Letters follow about him to
Maximianus (*Ep*. 34), and to him (*Ep*. 36).

   
*Scribonibus*.  The term denoted officers sent from the
imperial court into the provinces for executing certain duties; in this
case for raising recruits for the imperial army.  Cf. V. 30, note
8.

    *Parum aliquid
xenii*.  On *xenia*, see II. 23, note 8.

    We note here the
sarcastic vein in which Gregory from time to time pleasantly stimulates
Peter to activity.

    I.e. the *rector
patrimonii*.  The purport of this direction seems be that
agents from the laity might be appointed with advantage to assist the
*rector patrimonii*; and these must first be made *clerici*
by receiving the tonsure, so as to be qualified to act for the
Church.  The rectors themselves were usually at least
subdeacons.

   
*Scholastici*.  The designation appears to have been
applied generally to scholarly and learned persons.  Cf. Hieron.
*in Catal. Scriptor. Eccles*., “Serapion ob
elegantiam ingenii cognomen scholastici meruit.”  In
Gregory’s Epistles it seems to denote usually men learned in the
law, who might advise on legal points or sit as assessors.  In I.
44 (to Peter the subdeacon) *scholastici* are spoken of as having
given a legal opinion, Epistle 36 in Bk. IX. is addressed “Severo
scholastico exarchi,” and he is spoken of as one of those
“qui assistant judicibus.”  Cf. also IX. 58, 59, for
the employment of “Martinus Scholasticus, vir
eloquentissimus,” in a case of disputed jurisdiction over the
primate of the African province of Bizacia.  Such
*scholastici* were evidently persons of importance.  Gregory
addresses them by the title of “Gloria vestra” (IV. 40),
and of “Magnitudo tua” (IX. 58).  In IX. 12 he speaks
of the form of prayer which followed the words of institution in the
Canon of the Mass as having been composed by a *scholasticus*
(*precem quam scholasticus composuerat*), perhaps using the term
in the general sense of a scholar.

    See I. 46,
note.

    See I. 61, note
7.

   
*Præpositi*.  The word, though used also in a more
general sense, usually denotes the Prior of a monastery, appointed as
the Abbot’s vice-gerent.

    *Episcopi
Laurinensis*.  If the reading is correct, the See
intended is unknown.  Holstein (*Annot. in Geograph. Sacra*,
p. 21) suggests *Carinensem*, denoting the Sicilian See of
Carine, or Camarina.

    I.e. the first
seven books of the Bible.

Epistle
XXXIII.

*To Justinus, Prætor*.

Gregory to Justinus, &c.

The spite of the ancient foe has this way of its
own, that in the case of those whom, through God resisting him, he cannot delude into the perpetration
of evil deeds, he maims their reputation for a time by false
reports.  Seeing, then, that a sinister rumour about our brother
and fellow-bishop Leo had
disseminated certain things inconsistent with his priestly profession,
we caused strict and lengthened enquiry to be made as to whether they
were true, and we have found no fault in him touching the things that
had been said.  But, that nothing might seem to be omitted, and
that no possible doubt might remain in our heart, we caused him over
and above to take a strict oath before the most sacred body of the
blessed Peter.  And, when he had done this, we rejoiced with great
exultation that from a proof of this kind his innocence evidently shone
forth.  Wherefore let your Glory receive the aforesaid man with
all charity, and shew him reverence such as is becoming towards a
priest; nor let any doubtfulness remain in your heart touching the
charges from which he has now been purged.  But it lies upon you
so to cleave in all respects to the above-named bishop, that you may be
seen fittingly and becomingly in his person to honour God, whose minister he is.

---

    Now Prætor
of Sicily.  Cf. I. 2.

    Bishop of Catana
in Sicily.  Cf. I. 72.

Epistle XXXIV.

To Maximianus, Bishop of Syracuse.

Gregory to Maximianus, &c.

I remember to have often admonished you to be by no
means hasty in passing sentence.  And lo, I have now learnt that
your Fraternity in a fit of anger has excommunicated the most reverend
abbot Eusebius.  Now I am much 

astonished that neither his former
conversation, nor his advanced age, nor his long-continued sickness,
could turn your mind from wrath.  For, whatever his transgression
may have been, the very affliction of sickness ought to have sufficed
as a scourge for him.  For to one crushed by divine discipline it
was superfluous to add human scourges.  But perhaps thou hast been
allowed to exceed in the case of such a person, in order that thou
mightest become more cautious in the case of others of less account,
and ponder long when thou art disposed to smite any one through a
sentence.  Yet still comfort this same man with a sweetness
proportionate to the fury with which thou hast exasperated him, since
it is very unjust that the very persons who have loved thee most should
find thee without cause most bitter against themselves.

---

Epistle XXXVI.

To the Abbot Eusebius.

Gregory to Eusebius, &c.

Let thy Charity believe me that I have been
greatly saddened for thy sadness, as though I had myself suffered wrong
in thee.  But, when I afterwards learnt that, even after the most
reverend Maximianus, our brother and fellow-bishop, had restored thee
to his favour and communion, thy Love would not accept communion from
him, I then knew that what had been done before was just.  The
humility of God’s servants ought to
appear in a time of affliction:  but those who lift themselves up
against their superiors shew that they scorn to be God’s servants.  And, indeed, what he once did
ought not to have been done; but still it ought to have been taken by
thee with all humility:  and again, when he restored to thee his
favour, he ought to have been met with thanks.  And because it was
not so done by thee, I feel that to us in every way there is cause for
tears.  For it is no great thing for us to be humble to those by
whom we are honoured; for even any worldly man would do this:  but
we ought especially to be humble to those at whose hands we
suffer.  For the Psalmist says, *See my humility before mine
enemies* (Psal. ix.
14).  What life
are we leading, if we will not be humble even to our fathers? 
Wherefore, most beloved son, I beseech thee that all bitterness pass
away from thy heart, lest perchance the end should be near, and the
ancient foe should, through the iniquity of discord, bar against us the
way to the eternal kingdom.  Further, we have caused a hundred
*solidi* to be given to thy Love through Peter the subdeacon,
which I beg thee to accept without offence.

---

Epistle XXXVII.

To John, Bishop of Squillacium (Squillace, in
Calabria).

Gregory to John, &c.

The care of our pastoral office warns us to
appoint for bereaved churches bishops of their own, who may govern the
Lord’s flock with pastoral
solicitude.  Accordingly we have held it necessary to appoint
thee, John, bishop of the *civitas Lissitana* (*Lissus*,
hodie, *Alessio?*), which has been captured by the enemy, to be
cardinal in the Church of
Squillacium, that thou mayest carry on the cure of souls once
undertaken by thee, having regard to future retribution.  And
although, being driven from thine own Church by the invading enemy,
thou must govern another Church which is now without a shepherd, yet it
must be on condition that, in case of the former city being set free
from the enemy, and under the protection of God restored to its former state, thou return to the
Church in which thou wast first ordained.  If, however, the
aforesaid city continues to suffer under the calamity of captivity,
thou must remain in this Church wherein thou art by us
incardinated.  Moreover,
we enjoin thee never to make unlawful ordinations, or allow any
bigamist, or one who has taken a wife who was not a virgin, or one
ignorant of letters, or one maimed in any part of his body, or a
penitent, or one liable to any condition of service, to attain to
sacred orders.  And, shouldest thou find any of this kind, thou
must not dare to advance them.  Africans generally, and unknown
strangers, applying for ecclesiastical orders, on no account accept
seeing that some Africans are Manichæans, and some have been
rebaptized; while many strangers, though being in minor orders, are
proved to have pretended to a higher dignity.  We also admonish
thy Fraternity to watch wisely over the souls committed to thee, and to
be more intent on winning souls than on the profits of the present
life.  Be diligent in keeping and disposing of the goods of the
Church, that the coming Judge, when He comes to judge, may approve thee
as having in all respects worthily executed the office of shepherd
which thou hast taken upon thee.

---

    See I. 79, note
5.

    See as above.

Epistle XLI.

To Castorius, Bishop.

Gregory to Castorius, Bishop of Ariminum (Rimini).

What lamentable supplications have been poured out to us
by Luminosus, abbot of the 

monastery of St. Andrew and St. Thomas,
in the city of Ariminum, appears from the text of the subjoined
petition.  With regard to this matter we exhort thy Fraternity
that, on the death of the abbot of this same monastery, thy church
shall under no pretext interfere in scheduling or taking charge of the
property of the said monastery, acquired or to be acquired.  And
we desire thee to ordain as abbot of the same monastery none other but
him whom the whole congregation may by common consent demand as being
worthy in character and apt for monastic discipline.  Moreover, we
entirely forbid public masses to be celebrated there by the bishop,
lest occasion be given for popular assemblies in the retreats of
God’s servants, and also lest too
frequent an entrance of women be a cause of scandal (which God forbid), especially to the simpler souls. 
Further, we ordain that this paper by us written shall be carefully
held to, and kept in force and unadulterated in all future time by thee
and the bishops that shall be ordained after thee; that so, with the
help of God, both thy church may be content
with its own rights and no more, and also the said monastery, being
subject henceforth to none but general or canonical jurisdiction, and
free from all annoyances and vexations, may accomplish its divine work
with the utmost devotion of heart.

[In place of the epistle as above given, the following,
with the appended paper on the privileges of monasteries, is found in
some Codices.]

Gregory to Castorius, Bishop of Ariminum.

What lamentable supplications Luminosus, abbot of
the monastery of Saints Andrew and Thomas, in the city of Ariminum, has
poured out to us, appears from the text of the subjoined
petition.  For from his account we learn that in very many
monasteries the monks have suffered many prejudices and annoyances from
prelates.  It is therefore the duty of thy Fraternity to make
provision for their future quiet by a wholesome arrangement, to the end
that those who have their conversation therein in God’s service may, His grace assisting them,
persevere with minds free from disturbance.  But, lest from a
custom which ought to be rather amended than continued, any one should
presume to cause any kind of annoyance to monks, it is necessary that
the things which we have caused to be enumerated below should be so
carefully observed by the fraternity of bishops that no possible
occasion of introducing disquiet may be found hereafter.

Of the privileges of Monasteries.

We therefore interdict in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and forbid by the authority
of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, in whose stead we preside
over this Roman Church, that any bishop or secular person hereafter
presume in any way to devise occasions of interfering with regard to
the revenues, property, or writings of monasteries, or of the cells or
vills thereto appertaining, or have recourse to any tricks or
exactions:  but, if any case should by chance arise as to land
disputed between their churches and any monasteries, and it cannot be
arranged amicably, let it be terminated without intentional delay
before selected abbots and other fathers who fear God, sworn upon the most holy Gospels.  Also on the
death of the abbot of any congregation, let no stranger be ordained, or
any but one of the same congregation whom the society of the brethren
shall of its own accord have elected unanimously, and who shall have
been elected without fraud or venality.  But, if they cannot find
a suitable person among themselves, let them in like manner elect some
one from some other monastery to be ordained.  Nor, when an abbot
has been constituted, let any person whatever on any pretext be put
over him, unless perchance (which God forbid)
crimes be apparent which are shewn to be punishable by the sacred
canons.  Likewise the rule is to be observed, that monks must not,
without the consent of the abbot, be removed from monasteries for
constituting other monasteries, or for sacred orders, or for any
clerical office.  We also disallow ecclesiastical schedules of the
property of a monastery to be made by bishops.  But if,
circumstances requiring it, the abbot of a place should have questions
with other abbots concerning property that has come into possession,
let the matter be terminated also by their counsel or judgment. 
On the death also of an abbot let not the bishop on any pretext
intermeddle in the scheduling or taking charge of the property of the
monastery, acquired, or given, or to be acquired.  We also
entirely forbid public masses to be celebrated by him in a convent,
lest in the retreats of the servants of God
and their places of refuge any opportunity for a popular concourse be
afforded, or an unwonted entrance of women should ensue, which would be
by no means of advantage to their souls.  Nor let him dare to
place his episcopal chair there, or have any power whatever of command,
or of holding any ordination, even the most ordinary, unless he should
be requested to do so by the abbot of the place; that so the monks may
always remain under the

power of their abbots:  and let no
bishop detain a monk in any church without a testimonial and permission
from his abbot, or promote one without such permission to any
dignity.  We ordain, then, that this paper by us written be kept
to for all future time, in force and unadulterated, by all bishops;
that both they may be content with the rights of their own churches and
no more, and that the monasteries be subject to no ecclesiastical
conditions, or compelled services, or obedience of any kind to secular
authorities (saving only canonical jurisdiction), but, freed from all vexations and
annoyances, may accomplish their divine work with the utmost devotion
of heart.

---

    The text here
(“nullis canonicis juris deserviant”) appears to be
corrupt, being unintelligible.  The sense of the corresponding
clause in the shorter Epistle has been given in the translation.

Epistle
XLII.

To Luminosus, Abbot.

Gregory to Luminosus, abbot of the monastery of Saint
Thomas of Ariminum.

We were glad to receive thine own and thy
congregation’s petition, and accede to thy requests, in
accordance with the statutes of the Fathers and with form of law. 
For to our brother and fellow-bishop Castorius a letter has been sent
by our order, whereby we have taken away entirely from him and his
successors all power to harm thy monastery; so that neither may he any
longer come among you to be a burden to you, nor schedules be made of
the property of the monastery, nor any public procession take place there; this only jurisdiction
being still left to him, that he must ordain in the place of a deceased
abbot another whom the common consent of the congregation may have
chosen as worthy.  But now, these things being thus accomplished,
be you diligent in the work of God, and
assiduously devote yourselves to prayer, lest you should seem not so
much to have sought security of mind for prayer, as to have wished to
escape strict episcopal control over you while living
amiss.

---

    *Processio*
usually denotes the celebration of Mass.

Epistle
XLVI.

To John, Bishop.

Gregory to John, Bishop of Ravenna.

That I have not replied to the many letters of
your Blessedness attribute not to sluggishness on my part, but to
weakness, seeing that, on account of my sins, when Ariulph, coming to
the Roman city, killed some and mutilated others, I was affected with
such great sadness as to fall into a colic sickness.  But I
wondered much why it was that that well-known care of your Holiness for
me was of no advantage to this city and to my needs.  When,
however, your letters reached me, I became aware that you are indeed
taking pains to act, but yet have no one on whom you can bring your
action to bear.  I therefore attribute it to my sins that this
man with whom we are now concerned both evades
fighting against our enemies and also forbids our making peace; though
indeed at present, even if he wished us to make it, we are utterly
unable, since Ariulph, having the army of Authar and Nordulf, desires
their subsidies to be given him
ere he will deign to speak to us at all about peace.

But, as to the case of the bishops of
Istria, I have learnt
the truth of all you had told me in your letters from the commands
which have come to me from the most pious princes, bidding me abstain
for the present from compelling them.  I indeed feel with you, and
rejoice greatly in your zeal and ardour, with regard to what you have
written, and acknowledge myself to have become in many ways your
debtor.  Know nevertheless that I shall not cease to write with
the greatest zeal and freedom on this same matter to the most serene
lords.  Moreover the animosity of the aforesaid most excellent
Romanus Patricius ought not to move you, since, as we are above him in
place and rank, we ought so much the more to tolerate with forbearance
and dignity any light conduct on his part.

If, however, there is any opportunity of
prevailing with him, let your Fraternity work upon him, so that we may
make peace with Ariulph, if to some small extent we may, since the
soldiery have been removed from the city of Rome, as he himself
knows.  But the Theodosiacs, who have
remained here, not having received their pay, are with difficulty
induced to guard the walls; and how shall the city subsist, left
destitute as it is by all, if it has not peace?

Furthermore, as to
the gift redeemed from captivity, about whom you have written to us
asking us to enquire into her origin, we would have your Holiness know
that an unknown person cannot easily be traced.  But as to what
you say about one who has been ordained being ordained again, it is
exceedingly ridiculous, and outside the consideration of one disposed
as you are, unless perchance some precedent is adduced which ought to
be taken into account in judging him who is alleged to have done any
such thing.  But far be it from your Fraternity to entertain such
a view.  For, as one who has been once baptized ought not to be
baptized again, so one who has been once consecrated cannot be
consecrated again to the same order.  But in case of any
one’s attainment of the priesthood having been accompanied by
slight misdemeanour, he ought to be adjudged to penance for the
misdemeanour, and yet return his orders.

With regard to the city of Naples, in view of the urgent insistance of the
most excellent Exarch, we give you to understand that Arigis, as we have ascertained, has associated
himself with Ariulph, and is breaking his faith to the republic, and
plotting much against this same city; to which unless a duke be
speedily sent, it may already be reckoned among the lost.

As to what you say to the effect that alms should
be sent to the city of the schismatic Severus which has been
burnt, your Fraternity is of this opinion as
being ignorant of the bribes that he sends to the Court in opposition
to us.  And, even though these were not sent, we should have to
consider that compassion is to be shewn first to the faithful, and
afterwards to the enemies of the Church.  For indeed there is near
at hand the city Fanum, in which many have been taken captive, and to
which I have already in the past year desired to send alms, but did not
venture to do so through the midst of the enemy.  It therefore
seems to me that you should send the Abbot Claudius thither with a
certain amount of money, in order to redeem the freemen whom he may
find there detained in slavery for ransom, or any who are still in
captivity.  But, as to the sum of money to be thus sent, be
assured that whatever you determine will please me.  If, moreover,
you are treating with the most excellent Romanus Patricius for allowing
us to make peace with Ariulph, I am prepared to send another person to
you, with whom questions of ransom may be better arranged.

Concerning our brother and fellow-bishop
Natalis I was at one time
greatly distressed, in that I had found him acting haughtily in certain
matters; but, since he has himself amended his manners, he has overcome
me and consoled my distress.  In connexion with this matter
admonish our brother and fellow-bishop Malchus
that before he comes to us he render his accounts, and then depart
elsewhere if it is necessary.  And if we find his conduct good, it
will perhaps be necessary for us to restore to him the patrimony which
he had charge of.

---

    For elucidation of
the circumstances of this Epistle see above, Epistles 3, 29, 30.

    Viz. Romanus
Patricius, mentioned below, the Exarch of Ravenna, and as such
representing the Emperor in Italy.  See I. 33, “Ad Romanum
Patricium et Exarchum Italiæ.”

    *Precaria*;
apparently subsidies demanded for the support of the invading
army.  *Precarium* (or *Precarim*), which has various
applications, appears to be capable of this sense.  See Du
Cange.

    The Istrian
bishops still held out in refusing to accept the condemnation of
“The Three Chapters” passed in the fifth Œcumenical
Council at the instance of the Emperor Justinian.  Gregory, soon
after his accession, had summoned Severus, Bishop of Aquileia and
Metropolitan, with his suffragans, to Rome; and this, as he alleges, by
command of the Emperor, though the latter had now, it appears,
forbidden further proceedings.  See I. 16, and note.

    I.e. the soldiers
of the Theodosian Legion.

    With respect to
Rome Gregory has already complained that the Exarch would neither send
forces for its defence nor allow peace to be made with Ariulph. 
So also with regard to Naples, which Gregory understands to be now
threatened by the Lombards.  The Exarch, it appears, had been
urgent in insisting that it should hold out against the enemy
(“excellentissimo exarcho instanter imminente”), but
without giving any help for the purpose.  What Gregory here says
is that without aid from the Exarch its defence was hopeless.

    Aragis was the Lombard
duke of Beneventum.

    Viz. Aquileia, of
which Severus was bishop and Metropolitan, called here
*schismaticus* because of his holding out against Rome in the
matter of the Three Chapters.  The bribes he is said below to have
sent to Constantinople would be for inducing the Emperor to take his
part against Gregory.

    See above, Ep. 20,
in this Book, and I. 19, note 5, where references to other Epistles are
given.

    See II. 20, note
5.

Epistle
XLVII.

To Dominicus, Bishop.

Gregory to Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage.

We have received with the utmost gratification the
letters of your Fraternity, which have reached us somewhat late by the
hands of Donatus and Quodvultdeus, our most reverend brethren and
fellow-bishops, and also Victor the deacon with Agilegius the
notary.  And though we thought that we had suffered loss from the
tardiness of their coming, yet we find gain from their more abundant
charity; seeing that from this delay in point of time there appears no
interruption, but rather increase of the love which, by the mercy of
God, through your contemplation of the
priestly office, your practice of reading, and your maturity of age, we
know to be already firmly planted in you.  For it would not flow
so largely from you, had it not very many most abundant veins in your
heart.  Let us, therefore, most holy brother, hold fast with
unshaken firmness this mother and guard of virtues.  Let not the
tongues of the deceitful

diminish it in us, or any snares of the ancient
enemy corrupt it.  For this joins what is divided, and keeps
together what is joined.  This lifts up what is lowly without
tumour; this brings down what is lifted up without dejection. 
Through this the unity of the universal Church, which is the knitting
together of the Body of Christ, rejoices in its several parts through
the mind’s equalization of them, though having in it
dissimilarity from the diversity of its members.  Through this
these members both exult in the joy of others, though in themselves
afflicted, and also droop for the sorrows of others, though in
themselves joyful.  For seeing that, as the teacher of the
Gentiles testifies, if one member suffers anything, the other members
suffer with it, and if one member glories, all the members rejoice with
it, I doubt not that you groan for our perturbation, as it is quite
certain that we rejoice for your peace.

Now as to your Fraternity rejoicing with us on our
ordination, it displays to me the affection of most sincere
charity.  But I confess that a force of sorrow strikes through my
soul from contemplation of this order of ministry.  For heavy is
the weight of priesthood; seeing that it is necessary for a priest,
first to live so as to be an example to others, and then to be on his
guard not to lift up his heart because of the example which he
shews.  He should ever be thinking of the ministry of preaching,
considering with most intense fear how that the Lord, when about to depart to receive for Himself a
kingdom, and giving talents to His servants, says, *Trade ye till I
come* (Luke xix.
13).  Which
trading surely we carry on only if by our living and our speaking we
win the souls of our neighbours; if by preaching the joys of the
heavenly kingdom we strengthen all that are weak in divine love; if by
terribly sounding forth the punishments of hell we bend the froward and
the timid; if we spare no one against the truth; if, given to heavenly
friendships, we fear not human enmities.  And indeed it was in
thus shewing himself that the Psalmist knew that he had offered a kind
of Sacrifice to God, when he said, *Did I
not hate them, O God, that hated thee, and was
I not grieved with thine enemies!  Yea I hated them with a perfect
hated, and they became enemies unto me* (Ps. cxxxviii.
21).  But in view of this burden I
tremble for my infirmity, and look to the returning of the Master of
the house, after receiving His kingdom, to take account of us. 
But with what heart shall I bear His coming, if from the trading I
undertook I render Him no gain, or almost none?  Do thou,
therefore, most dear brother, help me with thy prayers; and what thou
seest me to fear for myself, consider daily on thine own account with
anxious dread.  For through the bond of charity both what I say of
myself is thy concern, and what I desire thee to do is mine.

Further, as to what your Fraternity writes about
ecclesiastical privileges, keep to this without any hesitation, since,
as we defend our own rights, so we observe those of several
churches.  Nor do I through partiality grant to any Church
whatever more than it deserves, nor do I under the instigation of
ambition derogate from any what belongs to it by right; but I desire to
honour my brethren in all ways, and study accordingly that each may be
advanced in honour, so long as there can be no opposition to it of
right on the part of one against the other.  Further, I greatly
rejoice with you in the manners of your messengers, in whom it has been
shewn me how much you love me, in that you have sent to me elect
brethren and sons.

Given the tenth of the Kalends of August, tenth
indiction.

---

    The bishop of
Carthage was primate of the province of Africa Proconsularis in virtue
of his See.  For the custom with regard to primacy in other
African provinces, see I. 74, note 2.  The fact, apparent from
this letter, that Dominicus had deemed sending to Gregory on his
accession the congratulatory letter that had been expected, and
Gregory’s carefulness to assure him, in the course of the
studiously courteous letter, of his desire to respect the ancient
privileges of Churches, may be among the symptoms, otherwise apparent,
of the authoritative claims of the Roman See being still viewed with
some jealousy in the African Church.  Cf. in Book VIII. Epistle
33, to the same Dominicus, in which Gregory, in praising his reverence
for the Apostolic See, attributes such reverence to his knowledge of
the origin of the African episcopacy, refraining from asserting in this
case any prerogative of divine right belonging to the See of S.
Peter.  Other letters to Dominicus are V. 5; VII. 35; XII. 1.

    In *English
Bible*, cxxxix. 21.

Epistle
XLVIII.

*To Columbus, Bishop*.

Gregory to Columbus, &c.

It is known, most dear brother in Christ, that the
ancient enemy, who by cunning persuasion deposed the first man from the
delights of Paradise to this life of care, and in him even then
inflicted the penalty of mortality on the human race, does now with the
same cunning, so as more easily to seize the flock, endeavour to infect
the shepherds of the Lord’s sheep with
infused poisons, and already to claim them as his own by right. 
But we, who, though unworthy, have undertaken the government of the
Apostolic See in the stead of Peter the prince of the apostles, are
compelled by the very office of our pontificate to resist the general
enemy by all the efforts in our power.  Now the bearers of these
presents, Constantius and Mustellus, have in a petition presented to us
given us to understand, and the deacons of the Church of Pudentiana
constituted in the province of Numidia assert, that Maximianus, prelate
of the same Church, corrupted by a bribe from the Donatists, has by a
new licence allowed a bishop to be made in the place where he lives;
which thing, though previous usage allowed it,

is prohibited from remaining and
continuing by the catholic faith.  On
this account, then, we have deemed it necessary to exhort thy
Fraternity by these present writings that, when Hilarus our
*chartularius* comes to thee, this same case be subjected to a
thorough and wise investigation in an united general council of
bishops, having the terror of the coming judge before their eyes. 
And if this charge should be proved with sufficient evidences by the
bearers of these presents against the aforesaid bishop, let him by all
means be degraded from the dignity and office which he enjoys, that
both he may return to the gains of penitence through acknowledgment of
his fault, and others may not presume to attempt such
things.

For it is right that one who has sold our
Lord Jesus Christ to a heretic for money
received, as is said to have been done, should be removed from handling
the mysteries of His most holy body and blood.  Further, if, apart
from this accusation, there is any contest afoot among them, as is
contained in the petition of the deacons themselves, with respect to
certain wrongs or private transactions, this let thy Fraternity with
our aforesaid *chartularius* fully enquire into with evidence
adduced, and decide it according to justice between all the
parties.

But, further, we have learnt through the
information given us by the bearers of these presents that the heresy
of the Donatists is for our sins spreading daily, and that very many,
leave being given them through venality, are being baptized a second
time by the Donatists.  How serious a matter this is, brother, it
behoves us with the whole bent of our minds to consider.  Lo, the
wolf tears the Lord’s flock, no longer
stealthily in the night, but in the open light; and we see him advance
in the slaughter of the sheep, and with no solicitude, with no darts of
words, do we oppose him.  What fruits, then, of a multiplied flock
shall we shew to the Lord, if even that of
which we have undertaken the feeding we see with easy mind mangled by
the wild beast?  Let us therefore study to inflame our hearts by
imitation of earthly shepherds, who often keep watch through winter
nights, pinched with showers and frost, lest even one sheep, and
perchance not a profitable one, should perish.  And, if the
prowler should have bitten it with greedy mouth, how do they busy
themselves, with what palpitations of heart do they pant, with what
cries do they leap forward to rescue the captured sheep, stimulated by
the pressing need, lest anything lost through their carelessness should
be required of them by the Lord of the
flock!  Let us then watch, lest anything should perish:  and,
if anything should by chance have been seized, let us bring it back to
the Lord’s flock by the cries of divine
discourses, that He who is the Shepherd of shepherds may mercifully
vouchsafe to approve us in His judgment as having kept watch over His
sheepfold.  This also it is needful for you to attend to wisely;
that, if there should be any proper petition on the part of the same
bishop against the bearers of these presents, it should be thoroughly
enquired into; and, if haply they themselves also should rightly
deserve to be smitten for their own fault, we pronounce that they
should by no means be spared on the ground of their having had the toil
of resorting to us.

In the month of August, tenth indiction.

---

    This Columbus was
one of the bishops in Numidia, who seems to have enjoyed the peculiar
confidence of Gregory, being written to on various questions concerning
the Church there, and charged with seeing to the exercise of discipline
over other bishops, though not himself the primate.  He is
addressed (III. 68; VIII. 13) as being himself especially devoted to
the Roman See.  Other letters addressed to him are III. 48; IV.
35; VI. 37; VII. 2; VIII. 28; XII. 8; XII. 28.

    The Donatists had
formerly been allowed their own bishop, tolerated along with the
Catholic ones.  This liberty was now disallowed, probably in
accordance with imperial edicts.  See I. 74, note 8.

Epistle
XLIX.

To Januarius, Archbishop.

Gregory to Januarius, archbishop of Caralis
(Cagliari).

If with integrity of heart we consider the priestly
office which we administer, the concord of personal charity ought so to
unite us with our sons that, as we are fathers in name, so we should be
proved by our affection to be so in deed.  While, then, we ought
to be such as has been said above, we wonder why such a mass of
complaints has arisen against thy Fraternity.  We still indeed
hesitate to believe it:  but, that we may be able to ascertain the
truth, we have sent to your parts John the notary of our See, supported
by our injunction, who may compel all parties to abide the judgment of
chosen arbitrators, and by his own execution carry their judgments into
effect.  Wherefore we exhort thy Fraternity by this present
writing to consider well with thyself beforehand the merits of the
cases; and, if you find that you have taken or hold anything unjustly,
in consideration of your priesthood to restore it before trial.

Now, among numerous complaints, the most distinguished
Isidore has complained of having been excommunicated and anathematised
by thy Fraternity for invalid reasons.  And, when we had wished to
learn from one of thy clergy who was here for what cause this had been
done, he gave us to understand that it had been done for no other cause
than that the man had done thee an injury.  This distresses us
exceedingly; since, if it is so, thou shewest that thou dost not think
of heavenly things, but givest signs of having thy conversation among
things of earth, having brought to bear 

the malediction of anathema to avenge a private
wrong; which is a thing forbidden by the sacred rules.  Wherefore
for the future be thoroughly circumspect and careful, and presume not
to inflict any such penalty again for vindication of thine own
wrongs.  For, shouldest thou do anything of the kind, know that it
will afterwards be avenged on thyself.

---

Epistle
LI.

To All Bishops.

Gregory to all bishops in the matter of the Three
Chapters.

I have received your letters with the utmost
gratification:  but I shall have far abundant joy, if it should be
my lot to rejoice in your return from error.  Now the forefront of
your Epistle notifies that you suffer severe persecution.  But
persecution, if endured irrationally, is of no profit at all unto
salvation.  For it is impious in any one to expect a recompense of
reward for sin.  For you ought to know, as the blessed Cyprian
says, that it is not the suffering that makes the martyr, but the cause
for which he suffers.  This being so, it is exceedingly
incongruous for you to glory in the persecution whereof you speak,
seeing that you are not thereby at all advanced towards eternal
rewards.  Let, then, purity of faith bring your Charity back to
your mother church who bare you; let no bent of your mind dissociate
you from the unity of concord; let no persuasion deter you from seeking
again the right way.  For in the synod which dealt with the three
chapters it is distinctly evident that nothing pertaining to faith was
subverted, or in the least degree changed; but, as you know, the
proceedings had reference only to certain individuals; one of whom,
whose writings evidently deviated from the rectitude of the Catholic
Faith, was not unjustly condemned.

Moreover, as to what you write about Italy among
other provinces having been especially scourged since that time, you
ought not to twist this into a reproach, since it is written, *Whom
the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth
every son whom he receiveth* (Hebr. xii. 6).  If, then, it is as you
say, Italy has been since that time the more loved by God, and in all ways approved, having been counted worthy
of enduring the scourge of the Lord. 
But, since it is not as ye try to make out by way of insulting over
her, attend ye to reason.

After the Pope Vigilius of illustrious memory,
having been appointed in the royal city,
promulgated a sentence of condemnation against Theodora, then empress,
or against the Acephali, the city of Rome
was then attacked and captured by enemies.  Does it follow from
this that the Acephali had a good case, or that they were unjustly
condemned, because such things happened after their condemnation? 
Away with the thought!  For it is not fit that either any one of
you, or any others who have been instituted in the mysteries of the
Catholic Faith, should say or in any way acknowledge this.  This
then being recognized, retire ye even now at length from the
determination you have come to.  Wherefore, that full satisfaction
may be infused into your minds, and all doubt removed, with respect to
the three chapters, I have judged it of advantage to send you the book
which my predecessor of holy memory, Pope Pelagius, had written on this
subject.  Which
book if you should be willing to read again and again, putting aside
the spirit of wilful self-defence, I have confidence that you will
follow it in all respects, and, notwithstanding all, return to union
with us.  But if henceforth, after perusal of this book, you
should decide to persist in your present determination, you will
doubtless shew that you gave yourselves up not to reason but to
obstinacy.  Wherefore once more, in a spirit of compassion, I
admonish your Charity, that, inasmuch as under God the

purity
of our faith has remained inviolate in the matter of the Three
Chapters, ye put away from you all swelling of mind, and return to your
mother the Church, who expects and invites her sons; and this all the
more speedily as you know that she expects you daily.

---

    This letter, being
in reply to one from the bishops addressed who are spoken of as being
at the time schismatics, cannot have been meant for the universal
episcopate.  They were probably those of Istria or elsewhere, who
were out of communion with Rome because of their refusal to accept the
condemnation of the “Three Chapters” by the fifth
Council.  See I. 16, note 3:  IV. 1, 2, 3, 4, 38, 39.

    I.e. Theodorus of
Mopsuestia, whose person, and not his writings only, was anathematized
in the fifth Council.  The sentence was; “Prædicta tria
capitula anathematizamus, id est, Theodorum Mopsuestenum cum nefandis
ejus scriptis, et quæ impie Theodoritus conscripsit, et impiam
epistolam quæ dicitur Ibæ, et defensores eorum.”

    Vigilius,
having gone to Constantinople with pope Agapetus, who died there, was
selected by the Empress Theodora as his successor, and sent back to
Italy with an order from her to Belisarius to bring about his election
(Liberatus, *Breviar*. c. 22).  Gregory seems to have been
unaware of the fact stated by Liberatus, namely that Vigilius had come
to a secret understanding with the Empress that he would support the
Monophysite party and disallow the Council of Chalcedon, as there is
good evidence that he did after his accession.  It is true that he
afterwards declared for orthodoxy, and condemned all abettors of the
Eutychian heresy.  But this appears to have been not till
a.d. 540, in reply to a letter received from
the Emperor Justinian and therefore subsequent to the occupation of
Rome by the Gothic King Theodatus, which was in 536, and to its siege
by Vitiges, who retired in 538.  Thus what Gregory goes on to say
about Rome having been attacked and captured by enemies after the
condemnation of heresy by Vigilius must be due to serious ignorance of
the facts of the case.  Nor does he appear to have known—at
any rate he does not intimate—that the condemnation of the Three
Chapters, pressed upon the fifth Council by the Emperor Justinian, had
been in spite of the opposition of Vigilius, though it is true that
this sorry pope did afterwards assent to it.

    The
Monophysites—or some of them—had come to be so called, as
being without a head, after their leader, Peter Mongus, had accepted
the See of Alexandria on the doctrinal basis of Zeno’s
*Henoticon*.

    Pelagius I., who
succeeded Vigilius, though he had formerly with him opposed the
condemnation of the Three Chapters, upheld it after his accession to
the popedom.  The “book” sent by Gregory to the
bishops may have been the Epistle given as Ep. VII., among those
attributed to Pelagius, addressed to Helias and the bishops of
Istria.

Epistle
LII.

*To Natalis, Bishop*.

Gregory to Natalis, Bishop of Salona.

As though forgetting the tenour of former letters, I had
determined to say nothing to your Blessedness but what should savour of
sweetness:  but, now that in your epistle you have recurred in the
way of argumentation to preceding letters, I am once more compelled to
say perhaps some things that I had rather not have said.

For in defence of feasts your Fraternity mentions the
feast of Abraham, in which by the testimony of Holy Scripture he is
said to have entertained three angels (Gen. xviii.).  In view of this example,
neither will we blame your Blessedness for feasting, if we come to know
that you entertain angels.  Again you say that Isaac gave a
blessing to his son when satiated (Gen. xxvii. 27).  Now as to both these
things in the Old Testament—since they were so done in the way of
history as still to have a meaning in the way of allegory—would
that we could so read through the accounts of the things done as to
perceive and take thought for the things to be done.  For indeed
the one, in saluting one only of the three angels, declared the Persons
of the Trinity to be of one Substance; the other blessed his son when
satiated, because one who is filled with divine banquets has his senses
extended into the power of prophecy.  But the words of Holy Writ
are divine banquets.  If, then, you read diligently—if,
drawing example from what is outward, you penetrate what is
inward—you will be satiated, as it were, from hunting in the
field, and fill the stomach of the soul, so as to be able to announce
things to come to your son placed before you, to wit to the people you
have taken in charge.  But one who prophesies anything of
God is already in the dark as to this world;
for it is assuredly right and fit that he whose senses are bright
inwardly through intelligence should see less through concupiscence
here below.

Take, therefore, these things to yourselves; and,
if you know yourselves to be such as I have said, you need not at all
doubt of our esteem.  I also find your Blessedness rejoicing if
you bear the name of “a gluttonous man” along with the
world’s Creator.  As to this I briefly comment thus; that,
if you are called so falsely, you do truly bear this name along with
the world’s Creator; but, if it is true of you, who can doubt
that it was false of Him?  A like name does not avail to acquit
you, if the cause for it is unlike.  For even the thief who was
condemned to die endured the cross with Him; but a like crucifixion did
not acquit him whom his own guilt bound.  But now I beseech
God with all the prayers I can offer that not
the name only, but the cause for it, may join your most holy Fraternity
to our Creator.

Further, your Holiness in your letters rightly praises
feasts which are made with the intention of bestowing charity. 
But yet you should know that they then truly proceed from charity, when
at them the lives of the absent are not backbitten, no one is censured
in derision, and no idle tales about secular affairs, but the words of
sacred reading, are heard; when the body is not pampered more than is
needful, but only its weakness refreshed, that it may be kept in health
for the practice of virtue.  If, then, you thus conduct yourselves
in your feasts, I own that you are masters of abstinence.

As to your alleging to me the testimony of the
apostle Paul, where he says, *Let not him that eateth not judge him
that eateth* (Rom.
xiv. 3), I think that
this was altogether out of place, seeing both that I am not one that
eateth not, and also that Paul did not here mean to say that the
members of Christ, who are mutually bound to each other in His body,
that is to say in his Church, with the bond of charity, should have no
care whatever for each other.  If, indeed, I had nothing to do
with thee, nor thou with me, I should rightly be compelled to hold my
peace, lest I should blame one whom I could not mend.  This
precept, then, was given only with reference to persons who go about to
judge those who have not been committed to their care.  But now
that we, by the ordering of God, are one, we
should be much in fault were we to pass over in silence what calls for
our correction.  Lo, thy Fraternity has taken it amiss to have
been blamed by me about feasts, while I, who surpass thee in my
position, though not in my life, am ready to be found fault with by
all, and by all to be amended.  And him only do I esteem to be a
friend to me, through whose tongue I wipe off the stains of my soul
before the appearance of the strict judge.

But as to what you say, most sweet brother, about your
being unable to read because of the pressure of tribulations upon you,
I think this avails little for your excuse, since Paul 

says, *Whatsoever things are written
are written for our instruction, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope* (Rom. xv. 4).  If, then, holy Scripture
has been prepared for our comfort, we ought by so much the more to read
it as we find ourselves the more wearied under the burden of
tribulations.  But if we are to rely only on that sentence which
you quote in your letter, wherein the Lord
says, *When they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall
speak, for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak; for
it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in
you* (Matth. x.
19), I say that Holy
Scriptures have been given us in vain, if, being filled with the
Spirit, we have no need of external words.  But, dearest brother,
trusting in God without doubt, when we are
straightened in a time of persecution, is one thing; what we ought to
do when the Church is at peace is another.  For it is our duty,
through this same Spirit, to learn by reading now what we may be able
to shew forth also in suffering, should cause arise.

Now, I rejoice exceedingly that you declare in
your letter that you are giving attention to exhortation.  For
thus I know that you are wisely fulfilling the duties of your position,
if you take pains to draw others also to your Maker.  But your
saying in the same sentence that you are not like me saddens me at
once, after I had begun to rejoice, since I think that it is in
derision that you give me praises which in truth I do not recognize as
due.  However, I give thanks to Almighty God that through you heretics are being recalled to holy
Church.  But it is needful for you to have a care that those also
who are contained in the bosom of holy Church live so that they be not
her adversaries through their evil lives.  For, if they give
themselves not to heavenly desires, but to earthly lusts and pleasures,
sons of strangers are being nourished in her bosom.

Now as to your declaring that you cannot possibly be
ignorant of the degrees of ecclesiastical rank, I too fully know them
with regard to you; and I am therefore much distressed that, if you
knew the order of things, you have failed, to your greater blame, in
knowing it with regard to me.  For, after letters had been
addressed to your Blessedness by my predecessor and myself in the cause
of the archdeacon Honoratus, then, the sentence of both of us being set
at nought, the said Honoratus was deprived of the rank belonging to
him.  Which thing if any one of the four patriarchs had done, such
great contumacy could by no means have been allowed to pass without the
most grievous offence.  Nevertheless, now that your Fraternity has
returned to your proper position, I do not bear in mind the wrong done
either to myself or to my predecessor.

But as to your saying that what has been handed down and
guarded by my predecessors ought to be observed in our times also, far
be it from me to infringe in any church the statutes of our ancestors
with regard to my fellow priests, since I do myself an injury if I
disturb the rights of my brethren.  But when your accredited
messengers arrive, I shall know the rights of the case between you and
the aforesaid archdeacon Honoratus; and my own personal examination of
it will shew you that, if you have the support of justice on your side,
you will sustain no injury from me; as indeed you never have
done.  But in case justice supports the plea of the
often-before-named Honoratus, I will shew by my acquittal of him that
in judgment I have no knowledge even of persons whom I knew.

Concerning the article of excommunication which,
if I may say so, was of necessity added to our letters (though even the
second and the third time with a condition interposed), your
Blessedness complains unreasonably, since the apostle Paul says,
*Having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience*
(2 Cor. x.
6).  But let these
things pass:  let us return to what concerns us now.  For, if
the lord Natalis acts as he should do, I cannot but be friends with
him, knowing how much I am a debtor to his affection.

---

    See I. 19,
note 5, with *reff*.

Epistle LIV.

*Here follows the Epistle of Saint Licinianus, bishop,
concerning the Book of Rules, addressed to Saint Gregory, pope of the
city of Rome*.

To the most blessed Lord
pope Gregory, Licinianus, bishop.

The Book of Rules issued by Thy Holiness, and by the aid
of divine grace conveyed to us, we have read with all the more pleasure
for the spiritual rules which we find contained in it.  Who can
fail to read that with pleasure wherein by constant meditation he may
find medicine for his soul; wherein, despising the fleeting things of
this world which vary in their mutability, he may open the eyes of his
soul to the settled estate of eternal life?  This 

book of thine is a palace of all
virtues.  In it prudence fixes the boundary line between good and
evil; justice gives each one his own, while it subjects the soul to
God, and the body to the soul.  In it
fortitude also is found ever the same in adversity and in prosperity,
being neither broken by opposition nor lifted up by success.  In
it temperance subdues the rage of lust, and discriminately imposes a
limit upon pleasures.  In it thou comprehendest all things that
pertain to the partaking of eternal life:  and not only for
pastors layest down a rule of life, but also to those who have no
office of government thou suppliest a rule of life.  For pastors
may learn in thy fourfold division what they should be in coming to
this office; what life they should lead after coming to it; how and
what they should teach, and what they should do to avoid being lifted
up in so high a position as that of priesthood.  This excellent
teaching of thine is attested by the holy ancient fathers, doctors, and
defenders of the Church; Hilary, Ambrose Augustin, Gregory
Nazianzen:  these all bear testimony to thee as did the prophets
to the apostles.  Saint Hilary says, in expounding the words of
the Apostle who was the teacher of the Gentiles, “For so he
signifies that the things belonging to discipline and morals serve to
the good desert of the priesthood, if those things also which are
necessary for the science of teaching and guarding the faith shall not
be wanting among the rest; since it does not all at once constitute a
good and useful priest only to act innocently, or only to preach
knowingly, seeing that, though a man be innocent, he profits himself
only unless he be learned, and that he that is learned is without the
authority of a teacher unless he be innocent.”  Saint Ambrose gives
attestation to this book of thine in the books which he wrote about
Duties (*de officiis*).  Saint Augustin gives
attestation, saying, “In action dignity should not be loved in
this life, neither power; since all things under the sun are
vain.”  But the work itself which is done by means of this
dignity or power, if it is rightly and profitably done, this is what
avails for that weal of subjects which is according to God.  Wherefore the Apostle says, “He that
desireth the office of a bishop desireth a good work.”  He
wished to explain what *episcopus* means; that it is a title
denoting work, not dignity.  For it is a Greek word derived
hence;—that he who is put over others overlooks those whom he is
put over, to wit, as taking care of them; for episcopacy is
overlooking.  Therefore, if we choose, we may say in Latin that to
exercise the office of a bishop is to overlook; so that one who
delights to be over others and not to profit them may understand that
he is no bishop.  For so it is that no one is prohibited from
longing to become acquainted with truth, for which purpose leisure is
to be commended; but as to a position of superiority, without which the
people cannot be governed, though it may be held and administered
becomingly, it is unbecoming to covet it.  Wherefore charity seeks
holy leisure, so as to have time for perceiving and defending the
truth.  But if [the burden of government] be imposed, it is to be
undertaken on account of the obligation of charity.  But not even
so should delight in the truth be altogether forsaken, lest the former
sweetness should be withdrawn, and the present obligation be oppressive
(*Lib.* viii. de *Trinit, num.* 1).

Saint Gregory attests, whose style thou followest,
and after whose example thou didst desire to hide thyself in order to
avoid the weight of priesthood; which weight, of what sort it is, is
clearly declared in the whole of thy book:  and yet thou bearest
what thou wast afraid of.  For thy burden is borne upwards, not
downwards; not so as to sink thee to the depths, but to lift thee to
the stars; whilst by the grace of God, and the
merit of obedience, and the efficiency of good work, that is made sweet
which seemed to have heaviness through human weakness.  For thou
sayest the things that are in agreement with the apostles and with
apostolic men.  For, being fair, thou hast said things fair, and
in them hast shewn thyself fair.  I would not have thee liken
thyself to an ill-favoured painter painting fair things, seeing that
spiritual teaching issues from a spiritual soul.  The human
painter is by most men esteemed more highly than the inanimate
picture.  But put not this down to flattery or adulation, but to
truth:  for it neither becomes me to lie, nor thee to commend what
is false.  I then, though plainly sincere, have seen thee and all
that is thine to be fair, and have seen myself as ill-favoured enough
in comparison with thee.  Wherefore I thee pray by the grace of
God which abounds in thee that thou reject not
my prayer, but willingly teach me what I confess myself ignorant
of.  For we are compelled of necessity to do what thou
teachest.

For, when there is no skilled person found for the
sacerdotal office, what is to be done but that an unskilled one such as
I am, should be ordained?  Thou orderest that no unskilled one
should be ordained.  But let thy prudence 

consider whether it may not suffice him for
skill to know Jesus Christ and Him crucified:  for, if this does
not suffice, there will, according to this book, be no one who can be
called skilled:  and so no one will be a priest, if none, unless
he be skilled, should be one.  For with open front we resist
bigamists, lest the sacrament should be thus corrupted.  What if
the husband of one wife should have touched a woman before his
wife?  What if he should not have had a wife, and yet should not
have been without touch of a woman?  Comfort us with thy pen, that
we may not be punished either for our own sin or that of others. 
For we are exceedingly afraid lest we should be forced to do what we
ought not to do.  Lo, obedience must be paid to thy precepts, that
such a one may be made a priest as apostolical authority approves; and
such a one as is sought is not found.  Thus faith will cease which
cometh of hearing; baptism will cease, if there should be no one to
baptize; those most holy mysteries will cease which are effected
through priests and ministers.  In either case danger
remains:  either such a one must be ordained as ought not to be,
or there must be no one to celebrate or administer sacred
mysteries.

A few years ago Leander, Bishop of Hispalis, on
his return from the royal city, saw us in passing, and told us that he
had some homilies issued by your Blessedness on the Book of Job. 
And, as he passed by in haste, he did not shew them to us as we
requested.  But thou wrotest afterwards to him about trine
immersion, and saidest in thy letter, as I am told, that thou wast
dissatisfied with that work, and hadst determined on maturer
consideration to change those homilies into the form of a
treatise.

We have indeed six books of Saint Hilary, Bishop
of Pictavia, which he turned into Latin from the Greek of Origen: 
but he has not expounded the whole of the book of holy Job in
order.  And I am not a little surprised that a man so very learned
and so holy should translate the silly tales of Origen about the
stars.  I, most holy father, can in no wise be persuaded to
believe that the heavenly luminaries are rational spirits, Holy
Scripture not declaring them to have been made either along with angels
or along with men.  Let then your Blessedness deign to transmit to
my littleness not only this work, but also the other books on morals
which in this Book of Rules thou speakest of having composed.  For
we are thine, and are delighted to read what is thine.  For to me
it is a desirable and glorious thing, as thy Gregory says, to learn
even to extreme old age.  May God the
Holy Trinity vouchsafe to preserve your crown unharmed for instructing
His Church, as we hope, most blessed father.

---

    Licinianus was
bishop of Carthagena in Spain, a Latin ecclesiastical writer. 
Isidore (*Lib. de illustribus Ecclesiæ scriptoribus*, c. 29)
says of him, “In scripturis doctus, cujus quidem nonnullas
epistolas legimus.  De sacramento denique baptismatis unam, et ad
Eutropium abbatem postea Valentiæ episcopum plurimas; reliqua vero
industriæ et laboris ejus ad nostram notitiam minime
pervenerunt.  Claruit temporibus Mauricii Augusti; occubuit
Constantinopoli veneno ut ferunt, extinctus ab æmulis Sed, ut
scriptum est, *Justus quacunque morte præoccupatus fuerit, anima
ejus in refrigerio est*.”  The “Book of
Rules” which he had received, was Gregory’s *Regula
Pastoralis*.

    This and the
succeeding quotations from the works of the Fathers are inaccurately
given, and in places hardly intelligible.  Where this is so, the
original passages have been followed in the translations.

    See I. 43.